Activities for Uncovering Primordial Wisdom
from the Chimé Pakmé Nyingtik, ‘The Heart Essence of the Sublime Lady of Immortality’
revealed by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

O Immortal Wish-fulfilling Wheel,In devotion, I pay homage to you, body, speech and mind.I shall
now elucidate the profound yoga of uniting with your nature, So practitioners may accomplish
the two siddhis.Samaya!
In a supreme place, solitary and pleasant,The practitioner of mantra who has received the empowerment
and keeps the samayas, Should set up a general maṇḍala. In the centre,  Place a
bandha (skullcup) with three sectionsFilled with calcite, shilajit,1 the three fruits, Indra’s
hand, the ‘weeping ceaselessly’ flower, And the five roots, all mixed together And rolled
into pills the size of peas. Cover them with red silk, and set out offerings and tormas.
On a comfortable seat, rest in equanimity,Then practise the preliminaries, the main part and
the conclusion. Samaya.
The Preliminaries
1. Taking Refuge
The first preliminary practice is to take refuge.
Visualize the objects of refuge in the sky in front of you.
namo
Namo.
dak sok dro kün changchub bar
Until we attain enlightenment, I and all sentient beings
könchok sum gyi ngowo nyi
Take refuge with unwavering devotion
lama yishyin khorlo la
In you, Guru Wish-fulfilling Wheel, who are
miché güpé kyab su chi
The very essence of the Three Jewels!
(three times)
2. Generating Bodhicitta
Second, arouse bodhicitta in aspiration and action.
ho, khanyam semchen malü kün
Hoḥ.  Sentient beings are as countless as space is vast,
dukngal tso lé draljé chir
In order to free every one of them from the ocean of suffering
jetsün pakmé naljor gyi
By attaining immortality through this yoga of the Sublime Lady,
chimé drubpar semkyé do
I arouse the enlightened mind of bodhicitta.
(three times)
3. Seven-Branch Offering
Third, the seven-branch offering.
ho, chok dü gyalwa sé ché dang
Hoḥ. I multiply my body as many times as there are atoms in the universe,
yumgyur drolmé shyab pemor
Overflowing with devotion, and pay homage, body, speech and mind
shying dul kün gyi drang nyé kyi
As I bow to the lotus beneath the feet of the buddhas and bodhisattvas of all directions and
times,
go sum güpé chaktsal lo
And to their sublime mother, Tārā.
chi nang sangwa lamepé
Here is an unsurpassable array of outer, inner and secret substances,
kunzang chötrin gyatsö chö
Like the vast cloud-like offerings of Samantabhadra.
dik drib nye tung tol shying shak
I confess all negative actions, obscurations, faults and downfalls,
tsok nyi chö la jéyirang
And rejoice in the practice of the two accumulations.
chökyi khorlo kor shyindu
Continue turning the wheel of the Dharma,
nyangen mida shyuk soldeb
And do not pass into nirvāṇa, but remain here, we pray.
gé tsok changchub nyingpor ngo
I dedicate our accumulation of merit towards the attainment of the heart of enlightenment.
shyendön sangye nyur drub shok
May we swiftly accomplish Buddhahood for the benefit of others.
The field of merit dissolves into you, inseparably.
In that state, arouse the vajra pride of being the wrathful activity deity.
4. Gektor
Fourth, offer the torma to the obstructing forces.
hung, döné khordé yermé kyang
Hūṃ. Primordially, saṃsāra and nirvāṇa are inseparable,
lobur trulpé dön gek kün
Yet temporary delusion manifests as negative forces and obstacle makers.
chöjin torma di long la
Accept this torma as an offering or a gift
rangshyin mepé ying su deng
And depart for the dharmadhātu empty of inherent existence.
Recite the fierce mantra, and throw power substances at them. Assume the gaze of the vajra view.
hung hung hung bisho benza krodha dzola maṇḍala pé pé pé hala hala hala hung
5. Visualizing the Protective Spheres
Fifth, meditate on the protective spheres.
hrih, nangsi nöchü tamché kün
Hrīḥ. All that appears and exists, environment and beings,
dorjé sungwé gurkhang dang
Is the vajra protection tent,
lha ngak nyukmé yeshe lé
And with deity, mantra and fundamental primordial wisdom,
tsam kyi kyilkhor lhüngyi drub
The boundary maṇḍala is spontaneously present.
benza jnana raksha om ah hung
vajra jñāna rakṣha oṃ āḥ hūṃ
6. Descent of Blessings
Sixth, visualize yourself clearly as the Sublime Lady, and chant the following invocation amidst
a profusion of brilliant rays of light, with yearning songs, incense and music.
chok chu dü shyii tsa sum lha
The three root deities of the ten directions and four times
pakmé sang sum chakgyar sé
Are aroused as the mudrās of the Sublime Lady’s three secrets—
dak né druppé dzé la tim
Let them dissolve into me, the place, the ritual implements and substances,
chinlap zijin barwar gyur
Which now blaze with the splendour of blessings.
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
ah la la ho | samaya ho | samaya satom
a la la ho | samaya ho | samaya stvaṃ
shyi ying chökü podrang né
From the expanse of the ground, the dharmakāya palace,
shyi nang sosor küntokpa
Arises the appearance of the ground, the discernment of everything,
pemé rik chok chomdendé
O bhagavatī of the supreme lotus family,
yishyin khorlo tsépelmé
Wish-fulfilling Wheel who increases longevity,
né dir jin pob wang chok kur
Bless this place and bestow the supreme empowerment,
lü ngak yi la yeshe kyé
Arouse primordial wisdom in our body, speech and mind,
tsesö paljor nyamtok por
Increase our longevity, merit, wealth, experience and realization,
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tsol
And grant us the ordinary and supreme accomplishments.
om taré tuttaré turé soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture svāhā
jnana benza samaya abheshaya a ah
jñāna vajra samaya āveshaya a āḥ
hrih hrih pem pem | hung hung hung | dza hung bam ho
hrīṃ hrīṃ pheṃ pheṃ | hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ | jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ
7. Blessing the Offerings
Seventh, bless the offering substances.
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
neyul dechen pemo kö
In the centre of the pure land of great bliss called Pemakö,
dakpa rabjam shying gi ü
An infinite, pure buddha field,
chi nang sangwé chödzé kün
All outer, inner and secret offerings
namkha dzö kyi khorlor gyur
Become the wheel of the sky treasury.
om ah hung sarva pudza megha samaya hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ sarva pūja megha samaya hūṃ
Samaya Seal Seal Seal

II. The Main Practice
Second, the stages of practice that make up the main part of the sādhana.
First, generation of the samayasattvas.
om maha shunyata jnana benza sobhava emako hang
oṃ mahāśūnyatā jñāna vajra svabhāva atmako ’haṃ
khordé chö kün zöma né
All things in saṃsāra and nirvāṇa are
ösal deshyin nyi ying lé
The primordial, luminous space of suchness, in which arises
zungjuk künnang nyingjé tsal
The power of all-illuminating compassion. Their union
gyu yi tingdzin tam karpo
Is the causal samādhi, a white tāṃ,
kha lé jatsön shyindu shar
Appearing like a rainbow in the sky and
ö trö nöchü ngödzin jang
Sending out light that purifies clinging to reality in the world and amongst beings.
jung nga yum gyi khalong du
Within the expanse of the five elements, the consorts,
norbu chushel lé drubpé
Stands the celestial mansion of great liberation,
tarpa chenpö shyalmé khang
Formed of precious crystal,
dru shyi go shyi tsennyi dzok
Complete with four sides, four doors and all its features.
yishyin rinchen tok gi dzé
A wish-fulfilling jewel beautifully ornaments its summit.
tabab chökhor ridak duk
It has toraṇas, dharma wheels, deer and parasols,
pagu drawa draché dang
And is adorned with the yellow brick frieze, festooned garlands,
sharbu dayab gyen gyi gyen
Sharbu ornaments, and pagoda roofs.
dönam chöpé lhamo dang
It is encircled by offering goddesses who stand on the pleasure terraces
chirol jikten kyongwé kor
And all this is surrounded by the worldly protectors.
dé ü pema dab shyi teng
In its centre on a four-petalled lotus, are
tabshé nyida khajor ü
Skilful means and wisdom—sun and moon fused together—
zungjuk tam yik nyompar shyuk
In the centre of which is the syllable tāṃ, as their union.
dé lé ö trö pakpa chö
Light emanates from tāṃ as an offering to the noble ones,
khordé dangchü chik tu dü
Gathering and bringing back the quintessence of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa,
yonggyur yeshe gyumé ku
Which transforms into the magical body of wisdom,
dü sum gyalwé trinlé dak
Embodiment of the enlightened activity of the buddhas, past, present and future,
chimé yishyin khorlo ni
Wish-fulfilling Wheel, bestower of immortality.
rabkar shyal chik chaknyima
Brilliant white, with one face and two hands,
chak yé chokjin yönpa ni
Her right hand in the mudrā of supreme generosity;
könchok sum tsön kyabjin gyé
Her left grants refuge, symbolizing the Three Jewels,
utpalar né tsebum nam
And holds an utpala flower supporting the vase of longevity.
shyi dzum yeshe chen dünden
Peaceful, smiling, with seven eyes of wisdom,
dar dang rinchen gyen gyi dzé
She is lovely and adorned with silks and jewelled ornaments.
shyab nyi dorjé kyiltrung gi
Her two legs crossed in vajra posture,
pema dawé den la shyuk
She sits on her lotus and moon disc seat.
rang ö tab chok gargyiwang
As her natural radiance her supreme skilful means, the Lord of the Dance,
pema tsebum nampé tril
Holds a lotus flower and long-life vase, and embraces her in union.
jéchak dechen gawa shyir
She passionately abides in undistracted great bliss and the four joys
nyompar shyukpé kha sang né
While her secret space emits
changsem sabön tam dang droom
The bodhicitta seed-syllables, tāṃ, bhrūṃ, hrīḥ and hūṃ.
hrih hung trodü jorwa lé
The syllables emanate and reabsorb rays of light. As they reabsorb the light,
shar du dorjé drolma ting
In the east, tāṃ transforms into dark blue Vajra Tārā,
chokjin utpal dorjé nam
Holding an utpala flower and a vajra in the mudrā of supreme generosity,
lho ru rinchen drolma ser
In the south bhrūṃ transforms into yellow Ratna Tārā,
chokjin utpal rinchen nam
Holding an utpala flower and a jewel in the mudrā of supreme generosity,
nub tu pemé drolma mar
In the west hrīḥ transforms into red Padma Tārā,
chokjin utpal chakkyu nam
Holding an utpala flower and an iron hook in the mudrā of supreme generosity,
jang du lé kyi drolma nak
In the north hūṃ transforms into black Karma Tārā,
chokjin utpal raldri nam
Holding an utpala flower and a sword, in the mudrā of supreme generosity.
tamché dar dang rinchen gyen
They are all adorned with the silks and jewelled ornaments,
shyi gyé wang drak nyam dangden
Wearing the pacifying, increasing, magnetizing and wrathful expressions.
shyabzung chekyil pé dar shyuk
Each sits on a lotus and moon disc in the half-vajra posture.
laryang dza hung bam ho trö
Again, the Sublime Lady emanates jaḥ, hūṃ, baṃ, and hoḥ.
go shyir pé nyi den gyi teng
These syllables are sent to the four doors where, on lotus and sun disc seats,
dorjé chakkyu shyakpa dang
They transform into Vajra Hook Tārā, Lasso Tārā,
chakdrok drilbü drolma ni
Iron Chain Tārā and Bell Tārā,
kar ser mar jang shyitrö nyam
White, yellow, red and green respectively, with semi-wrathful expressions
rangtak chaktsen utpal nam
And each holding her own hand implement and an utpala flower.
kyangkum gar gyi dü shyi dzi
Dancing, with one leg stretched and the other bent, they suppress the four māras,
dar dang ratné gyen gyi dzé
And are adorned with the silks and jewelled ornaments.
bartsam tsa sum chösung tsok
A host of the three root deities and dharma protectors fill the whole of space,
ying lé yeshe rangsharwé
As a great net of magical emanations
gyutrul drawa chenpö tsul
That is the self-radiance of primordial wisdom arising from basic space,
nyima dang ni özer shyin
Akin to the sun’s rays and the sun itself.
sosö rik kyi tsombur ché
Gathering in vast family assemblies,
nangsi shyir shyeng chenpö lha
The deities—the great arising as the ground of all that appears and exists—
makyé yédzok tsul du sal
Manifest clearly, unborn yet primordially perfect.
kün kyang chi drin tukka ru
The crown of their heads, their throats and hearts,
dorjé sum gyi yigé tsen
Are marked with the syllables of the three vajras,
dé le tröpé özer gyi
From which rays of light stream out and
yeshe sempa chendrang gyur
Invite the jñānasattvas.
2. Inviting the Jñānasattvas
Second, invite the jñānasattvas.
hrih, sosor küntu tokpa yi
Hrīḥ. Long-life Goddess with supreme discerning wisdom,
yeshe chenpo tsé yi lha
Crowned by Amitābha, the Buddha of Limitless Light,
öpakmépé ugyen chen
Lady who is the enlightened activity
dü sum sangye trinlé ma
Of the buddhas of past, present and future,
tsur shek yishyin khorlo chang
Approach! You who manifest as the Wish-fulfilling Wheel
rik kyi tsombu trulkhor ché
With the retinue of assembled families that you emanate—
chöku kyewa mepa lé
Rūpakāyas that magically arise
kyewé chotrul zuk kyi ku
From the dharmakāya beyond arising.
nyingjé chenpö tukdam gyi
Your samaya of great compassion obliges you
drub la ngödrub chok tsol chir
To confer the supreme siddhi on this practitioner,
damtsik kyilkhor dir gong la
Direct your wisdom mind into this maṇḍala of the samayasattva,
dorjé yeshe kyé du sol
And arouse in me indestructible vajra wisdom!
samaya ho
samaya hoḥ
samaya satom
samaya stvaṃ
é arali hring hring dza
e āralli hrīṃ hrīṃ jaḥ
jnanasato a ah
jñānasattva a āḥ
3. Requesting the Jñānasattvas to Remain
Third, invite the jñānasattvas to remain, steadfast.
ying né chendrang yeshepa
The jñānasattvas, invited from the dharmadhātu
damtsik khorlor guk shyuk ching
Are drawn into and bound to the samaya maṇḍala,
gyé nyam chenpor rochik gyur
Where they stay, rejoicing in the great equality of 'one taste'.
om, dorjé yeshe lamepé
Oṃ. Enlightened body, speech and mind mudrās
ku sung tuk kyi chakgya ni
Of the unsurpassable vajra wisdom,
tingdzin trulpé lhatsok dang
Come and remain securely in great inseparability,
yermé chenpor tenpar shyuk
Forever indivisible from the host of deities made manifest through samādhi.
benza jnana dza hung bam ho
vajra jñāna jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ
samaya tishta lhen
samaya tiṣhtha lhen
4. Prostration
Fourth, pay homage with devotion.
hrih, chimé pakmé kyilkhorpa
Hrīḥ. To the deities of the maṇḍala of the Sublime Lady of Immortality,
döné rang dang lhenchik kyé
Primordially innate within me, and
nyidzin dralwa tawé chak
Free from dualistic clinging, I offer the homage of the view
daknyam chökü ying su tsal
In the expanse of the purity and equality of dharmakāya.
a la la ho | ati pu ho | pratitsa ho
a la la hoḥ | ati pu hoḥ | pratīccha ho
5. Offerings
Fifth, offerings.
rang lé dorjé lhamö tsok
I send out hosts of vajra goddesses
namkha gangwar rabtrö té
Who fill the sky,
chöpé trin chen tibpar gyur
Holding great clouds of offerings to pervade the whole of space.
Outer Offering
om, ngöjor yi kyi nam trulpé
Oṃ. Whether actually present, or manifested by the mind,
shyingkham gyatsö chödzé kün
All the offerings in countless universes, inner, outer and secret,
pakma yishyin khorlor bul
I offer to you, noble Wish-fulfilling Wheel:
shyé né chimé ngödrub tsol
Accept them and grant the siddhi of immortality!
om arya tara sapariwara argham padam pupé dupé aloké gendhé newité shapda pratitsa soha
oṃ ārya tārā saparivara arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣhpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naividyā shabda pratīccha svāhā
Inner Offering
om, yul dang wangpor drelwa yi
Oṃ. These objects stimulate the senses
zungdzin dewa chenpor shar
And this duality arises as great bliss;
dorjé zuk dra dri ro rek
Accept this offering of vajra form, sound, smell, taste and touch
chöpé chakgya chenpor shyé
As the great mudrā of offering.
om arya tara sapariwara rupa shapda ghandé rasa saparshé pratitsa soha
oṃ ārya tārā saparivāra rūpa śabda gandhe rāsa sparśe pratīccha svāhā
Secret Offering
om, tsa gyé tong jar amrita
Oṃ. Amṛta of eight main and one thousand minor ingredients,
kham sum dralwé rakté chü
Rakta, the essence of the liberation of the three worlds,
döyön ngaden balingté
And the baliṃta that delights the five senses,
kyilkhor lhatsok nyégyur chik
May these offerings please the host of maṇḍala deities!
sarva  pentsa  amrita  maha  rakta  maha  balingta  khahi
sarva pañca amṛita mahā rakta mahā baliṃta khāhi
Ultimate Offering
a, chöja chöjé chöyul sok
Āḥ! Natural clear light bodhicitta
khor sum tröpa lé depé
Is beyond the elaboration of the three spheres
rangshyin ösal changchub sem
Of offering substances, the offerer, the act of offering and so on,
chok gi chöpa chenpor shyé
Please, accept it as the great, supreme offering.
sarva dharmadhatu emako hang
sarva dharmadhātu ātmako ‘haṃ
6. Offering Praise with Vajra Song
Sixth, offer praise in a vajra song.
om, jikten wangchuk nyingjé dak
Oṃ. You were born from the tears of
shyal gyi chukyé lé jungwa
The lord of the world and master of compassion.
dü sum sangye kyé dzé yum
Mother of the buddhas of past, present and future,
yishyin khorlo khyö la tö
Wish-fulfilling Wheel, to you I pay homage and offer praise!

drimé dawa norbü dok
The colour of the stainless moon, jewel of the sky,
chokjin utpal chakgya chen
You hold an utpala flower in the mudrā of supreme generosity,
shyi dzum tsenpé palbarwé
Peaceful and smiling, blazing with the splendour of the signs and marks—
dorjé ku la chaktsal tö
To your vajra body, I pay homage and offer praise!

yang kyi yenlak gyatso lé
Your melodious speech, an ocean of qualities,
shyi sil dütsi char bebpé
Sprinkles a soothing and refreshing shower of amṛta
semchen khamnam sé dzepa
That awakens the buddha nature in sentient beings—
tsangpé sung la chaktsal tö
To your Brahma speech, I pay homage and offer praise!

khyen dang tsewé yeshe kyi
With your wisdom of knowledge and love, you see everything,
sheja kün la nyompar juk
From the perspective of the samādhi of equanimity,
samgyi mikhyab chakgya ché
Without moving from the space of the inconceivable great seal.
ösal tuk la chaktsal tö
To your mind of clear light, I offer praise and homage.

gang gi khyö la soltabpé
Whoever prays to you,
dé la dé ma tak jinlob
You bless instantly, and
ngödrub dögu tsol dzepé
Grant them the accomplishments and everything they desire—
yönten patayé la tö
To your infinite enlightened qualities, I pay homage and offer praise!

tsen dang ku yi köpa dang
With your names and array of forms,
rigpé sang ngak natsokpé
With the various secret mantras of awareness,
shyi gyé wang dang ngönchö kyi
You pacify, enrich, magnetize, and subjugate—
trinlé lhüngyi drub la tö
To your spontaneously accomplished enlightened activities I pay homage and offer praise!

chönyi chik lé mayö kyang
You do not move from unique dharmatā,
duljé sampa jishyindu
Yet in accord with the capacity of beings to be trained,
gyutrul drawé tsul tönpa
You display a net of magical emanations—
kyilkhor lhatsok kün la dü
To all the deities of the maṇḍala, I pay homage!
7. Mantra Recitation
Seventh, the recitation.
a. Approach
The close approach meditation.
rangnyi pakmé tukka ru
I am sublime Tārā: in my heart
yeshe sempa tsepakmé
Is the jñānasattva Amitāyus,
karsal nyamshyak tsebum dzin
Brilliant white and holding a long-life vase in the mudrā of meditation,
dar dang rinchen gyen gyi dzé
Beautiful with his silk and jewelled ornaments,
dorjé kyiltrung pé dar shyuk
In vajra posture on a lotus and moon disc seat,
ö dang özer trowa yi
Shining and resplendent amidst brilliant rays of light.
tuk ü chukyé nyidé ü
In the centre of his heart is a lotus, and sun and moon discs
tam tar ngak kyi trengwé kor
In the middle of which is tāṃ encircled by the mantra mālā.
depé tukdam gyü kul té
Reciting the mantra evokes his wisdom mind, causing
ö kyi nangwa tayepa
A stream of boundless light to burst out
tsuktor norbü tsé né tön
From the top of the jewel on the uṣṇīṣa at the crown of my head,
dé lé pakma nampargyal
From which appears the sublime Vijayā,
chushel dokchen chak yé kyi
The colour of crystal. Her right hand,
kyabjin chakgyé chakkyu dang
In the mudrā of granting refuge, holds a hook;
yönpé chokjin tsebum nam
Her left, in the mudrā of supreme giving, holds a long-life vase.
ö dang özer dang chepa
She radiates light and rays of light, and
drangmé nyizer dul tar trö
Limitless forms of herself stream out like specks of dust in sunbeams.
kyilkhor lhatsok tamché dang
They draw in all the wisdom, love and power
chok chü gyalwa sé dangché
Of all the deities of the maṇḍala,
yidam pawo naljorma
All the buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten directions,
dorjé chösung gyatso yi
All the yidams, ḍākas and ḍākinīs, and
khyentsé nüpé yeshe dang
All the protectors of the Vajrayāna teachings.
tenyö dangchü tamché kün
They also draw in all the subtle vital essence of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, the animate and inanimate
universe,
drubpé ngulchu jishyin du
In the form of the mercury that accomplishes all
dewa chenpö nampar dü
Marked with forms of great bliss.
dak dang drubpé dzé la tim
It dissolves into me and the ritual implements,
chimé tsé yi ngödrub dang
Granting me the siddhi of immortal life,
dechen yeshe gyepar gyur
And intensifying the wisdom of great bliss.
om  taré  tuttaré  turé  soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture svāhā
This is the main mantra you recite. Then say,
om taré tuttaré turé hrih droom benza jnana ayukhé soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture hrīḥ bhrūṃ vajra jñāna āyuṣe svāhā
This will draw in the accomplishments you wish. To practise close approach with the jñānasattvas
and its emanations,You should also recite the following vajra mantras:
om  amarani  jiwantiyé  soha
oṃ amāraṇi jīvantiye svāhā
om  amrita  ayurdadé  soha
oṃ amṛita ayurdade svāhā
If you practice this diligently for three weeksYou will actually see the face of the maṇḍala
deities,In meditation or in your dreams;You will hear them and accomplish the ‘warmth of
samādhi.’ You will dream of the sun and moon rising and flowers blooming. The bandha will
actually overflow,The pills will increase in number and wonderful perfumes will be emitted.
These and other such signs will occur. Samaya
b. Accomplishment
The accomplishment phase to seal appearances.
laryang özer trodü trin
Again, great cloud-like rays of light emanate and return,
kyilkhor lhatsok tukkar tim
And dissolve into the heart of the maṇḍala deities
zakmé dewa chenpö nyam
Who experience untainted great bliss.
dorjé yeshe chok tu kyé
Indestructible, supreme primordial wisdom arises
detong rolpé nangwa yi
And all worlds and beings within the three realms
kham sum tenyo tamché khyab
Appear as the play of bliss and emptiness.
chinö long nga ying kyi dal
The outer environment are the five spaces2 and the maṇḍala of the dharmadhātu,
nangchü rigpa chakgyé ku
The beings within it are awareness in the form of deities,
shyommé ngak kyi dra dang dang
The sounds are the indestructible mantras;
chok tu mingyur ösalwé
They are all the miracles of the one and only samādhi
tingdzin chik gi chotrul gyi
Of supreme, unchanging Clear Light—
khordé nangsi chö nam kün
All phenomena of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa that appear and exist,
gyutrul drawé khorlor gyur
Become the wheel of the net of magical manifestation.
Focus your mind without giving in to distraction and recite the three mantras of approach.
Then say the following mantras.
om  taré  tam  soha
oṃ tāre tāṃ svāhā
om  taré  droom  soha
oṃ tāre bhrūṃ svāhā
om  taré  hrih  soha
oṃ tāre hrīḥ svāhā
om  taré  hung  soha
oṃ tāre hūṃ svāhā
As you recite the mantra of each deity, Concentrate on the practice of emanating and re-absorbing
rays of light. Practise like this for one week and the signs of accomplishment will
be secured And you will have developed the power of the practice. Samaya!
c. Activity
Add the activities once accomplishment has been achieved.
rangnyi damtsik yeshe dang
I, the samayasattva,
trulpé sempa nam sum gyi
Together with the jñānasattva and nirmāṇasattva,
tukjé özer rab tröpé
Send forth a brilliant profusion of rays of compassion
drolma rik shyi tuk gyü kul
That invoke the wisdom mind of the Tārās of the four families.
dé le tröpé özer gyi
In turn, they send out rays of light
trinlé gomé gyü kul né
That invoke the wisdom mind of the gatekeepers who accomplish activities.
ngak kyi rangdra drokpé ku
Deities resounding their own mantras
namkha gangwar chok chur khyab
Fill the sky and pervade the ten directions.
gang dul dzepa tayé kyi
With infinite ways of training those beings who are ready,
ne dön dik drib ying su shyi
They pacify all disease, harmful forces, negativities and obscurations within dharmadhātu,
tse sö paljor rigpa gyé
They increase longevity, merit, wealth and intelligence,
kham sum lungsem rangwang gyur
Bring the three realms, inner air and mind under control,
dra gek zungdzin tsarchépé
Destroy enemies, obstacle makers and duality.
tünmong chok gi trinlénam
These supreme and common activities,
tingdzin trodü chotrul gyi
Through the magic of the samādhi of emanating and re-absorbing rays of light,
yishyin nyi du drubpar gyur
Are all accomplished as I envision them.
om taré tam dza shanting kuru soha
oṃ tāre tāṃ jaḥ śāntiṃ kuru svāhā
om taré droom hung pushting kuru om
oṃ tāre bhrūṃ hūṃ puṣṭiṃ kuru oṃ
om taré hrih bam washam kuru ho
oṃ tāre hrīḥ baṃ vāśaṃ kuru hoḥ
om taré hung ho maraya pé
oṃ tāre hūṃ hoḥ māraya phaṭ
Concentrate on the samādhi of pacifying at dawn, of enriching at sunrise, Of magnetizing at
night, And of subjugating at dusk. When the dawn of the vajra rakṣa breaks3 Invoke the siddhis
and receive the empowerments From the accomplishment substances while tasting the samaya
nectar of amṛta.Then consider that you have actually received the two accomplishments.
Hang the remaining pills around your neck, And secretly take some from time to time. Samaya.
By practicing the three phases of approach, accomplishment and activity in this way,Based on
the meditation on the Sublime Lady, You will accomplish your own benefit, vajra longevity,And
the benefit of others with activities so numerous that they pervade the whole of space.
Samaya. Seal. Seal. Seal.

The Offering of the Tsok of Great Bliss
Gather the samaya substances,
Madana and bala, and so on.
Blessing the Offerings
Say:
ram yam kham
Raṃ yaṃ khaṃ
And purify with amṛta.
tongpé ngang lé lung mé teng
Out of the state of emptiness arises, upon wind and fire,
nö ni dechen kapalar
The container, the kapāla of great bliss.
chü ni rik ngé damtsik dzé
Inside which are the samaya substances of the five families,
döyön dütsi pungpor gyur
In an abundance of desirable offering nectar.
om hung tram hrih ah
oṃ hūṃ trāṃ hrīḥ āḥ
ha ho hri
ha hoḥ hrīḥ
Inviting the Deities
hrih, omin chöying podrang dang
Hrīḥ. From the Akaniṣṭha palace of dharmadhātu,
yulokö dang potala
From Yulokö and Potala,
durtrö gyé dang nyer shyi yul
From the eight charnel grounds, the twenty-four sacred places
sumchu tsanyi néchok né
And the thirty-two hallowed lands,
kunzang dorjé naljorma
Samantabhadrī Vajrayoginī,
jetsün khorwa droldzé yum
Most excellent mother who liberates saṃsāra,
tsa sum chösung gyatsor ché
Together with an ocean of three root deities and dharma protectors,
tsok kyi duwar chendren na
You are invited to this tsok gathering.
tukjé wang gi shek su sol
Out of your great compassion, please come!
Descent of Blessings
tsokkhang rangshyin trulpé shying
Bless this tsok temple as a natural nirmāṇakāya pure field,
döyön dorjé damtsik dzé
Bless these desirable offerings as vajra samaya substances,
chir nang lha dang ngak kyi dra
And bless all that appears as deities and all sound as mantras.
yeshe chenpor jinpob chik
Rain down the blessings of the great primordial wisdom!
sarva samaya dza dza
sarva samaya jaḥ jaḥ
Offering the First Portion
Outer Offering
om, rangjung tsenden kapalar
Oṃ. In the perfect self-arisen kapāla
zacha tungwé tsoktor sham
Lies the tsok torma of food and drink.
tab dang sherab damdzé di
This samaya substance is skilful means and wisdom.
chi yi chöpar shyé su sol
Please accept it as the outer offering.
naljor dakchak khor ché kyi
We confess all breakages of the samayas of the body
ku yi damtsik nyampa shak
For which we yogis and our companions are responsible.
pungpö dü tsok ying su drol
Liberate all the demons of aggregates into basic space,
mishik ku yi tsewang tsol
And bestow the long-life empowerment of ‘indestructible body’.
samaya ganachakra pudza ho
samaya gaṇacakra pūja hoḥ
Inner Offering
a, nangwa nö kyi kapalar
Āḥ. In the kapāla of appearance, the environment,
sipa chü kyi tsoktor sham
Lies the tsok torma of existence, sentient beings.
döyön gyatsö damdzé di
This samaya substance is an ocean of desirable things,
nang gi chöpar shyé su sol
Please accept it as the inner offering.
naljor dakchak khor ché kyi
We confess all breakages of the samaya of speech
sung gi damtsik nyampa shak
For which we yogis and our companions are responsible.
chidak dü tsok ying su drol
Liberate all the demons of the Lord of Death into basic space,
gakmé sung gi tsewang tsol
And bestow the long-life empowerment of ‘unceasing speech’.
pentsa kama ganachakra pudza ho
pañcha kāma gaṇacakra pūja hoḥ
Secret Offering
hung, tsa sum khorlö kapalar
Hūṃ. In the kapāla of the three channels and the chakras
changchub sem kyi tsoktor sham
Lies the tsok torma of bodhicitta.
detong yermé damdzé di
This is the samaya substance of inseparable bliss and emptiness,
sangwé chöpar shyé su sol
Please accept it as the secret offering.
naljor dakchak khor ché kyi
We confess all breakages of the samaya of mind
tuk kyi damtsik nyampa shak
For which we yogis and our companions are responsible.
nyönmong dü tsok ying su drol
Liberate all the demons of destructive emotions into basic space,
ösal tuk kyi tsewang tsol
And bestow the long-life empowerment of the ‘mind of clear light’.
maha sukha ganachakra pudza ho
mahāsukha gaṇacakra pūja hoḥ
Ultimate Offering
ho, chöying trödral kapalar
Hoḥ. In the kapāla of the great simplicity of dharmadhātu
rigpa rangsal tsoktor sham
Lies the tsok torma of self-luminous rigpa.
zungjuk chenpö damdzé di
This is the samaya substance of great unity,
lamé chöpar shyé su sol
Please accept it as the unsurpassable offering.
naljor dakchak khor ché kyi
We confess all breakages of samayas of the three secrets
sang sum damtsik nyampa shak
For which we yogis and our companions are responsible.
lha bü dü tsok ying su drol
Liberate all the demons of the ‘sons of gods’ into basic space,
yeshe dorjé tsewang tsol
And bestow the long-life empowerment of ‘vajra primordial wisdom’.
jnana dhatu ganachakra pudza ho
jñānadhātu gaṇacakra pūja hoḥ
In this way, offer the first portion to the maṇḍala.
Second Offering
Second, place the offering next to the maṇḍala.
lhatsok dütsi rabnyé né
The amṛta completely satisfies the deities.
dewé dra dang özer gyi
They utter sounds of bliss, radiate rays of light,
si dang shyiwé dangchü dü
And gather the essence of existence and peace,
damtsik tsok kyi dzé la tim
Which dissolves into the samaya tsok substances
nyongdrol dütsi pungpor gyur
To become a huge pile of amṛta that ‘liberates upon taste’.
om ah hung jnana amrita ganachakra sarva siddhi hung hrih ta
oṃ āḥ hūṃ jñāna amṛita gaṇacakra sarva siddhi hūṃ hrīḥ ṭha
Bless the offering as amṛta by reciting this mantra 108 times,and offer it to the body maṇḍala.
Outside the maṇḍala, also give it to those who keep the samayas. Their longevity and wisdom
will increase.
Remainder Offering
Finally, make the remainder offering.
hrih pem, ngön tsé drubpé heruka
Hrīḥ pheṃ! In the past, when the siddha heruka
rigdzin shri'i singha dang
Vidyādhara Śrī Siṃha,
lobpön bimamitra dang
Ācārya Vimalamitra
chimé pema tötreng gi
And the immortal Pema Thötrengtsal
durtrö chenpö né gyé du
Turned the wheel of the gaṇacakra
tsok kyi khorlö gyurpé tsé
In the eight great charnel grounds,
pawo khandro shyingkyong gi
You ḍākas, ḍākinīs and Dharma protectors,
lhakmé torma ngö su lang
Received the remainder torma.
ka shyin drubpar damchepé
Now, as we invoke your vajra pledge
dorjé yal gam deng kul na
To do as you are instructed,
döyön chöpa di shyé la
Accept this offering of desirable things,
naljor dakchak khorché kyi
And dispel the outer, inner and secret obstacles
chi nang sangwé barché sol
We yogis and our companions face,
tse sö paljor yeshe kyé
Arose our life, merit, wealth and wisdom,
nam shyi trinlé nyur drub dzö
And quickly accomplish the four activities.
utsita ganachakra pudza ho
ucchiṣhṭa gaṇacakra pūja hoḥ
Aspiration Prayer
dechen dorjé damtsik dzé
By enjoying with great delight,
tsok kyi chöpa lanamé
The samaya substances of indestructible great bliss,
gyepa chenpö longchö kyi
Which are this unsurpassable tsok offering,
chimé yeshe ku drub shok
May we accomplish the immortal wisdom body.
Pray in this way and persevere in the Secret Mantra activities.4 Will have their obstacles pacified,
and their life and merit will increase. Subsequently they will become supreme vajra
vidyādharasIn the ḍākinī realm of Oḍḍiyāna. Guhyasamaya. Seal. Seal. Seal.
Conclusion
Cheto Offering
Recount the story of the pledge made in the past by the protectors.
hung jo, dü sum pogyur mepé long
Hūṃ bhyo! In the expanse beyond the transience of the three times,
rigpa rangsal kechikma
Self-luminous rigpa awareness, instantly arose
chakgyé zuk su sharwa na
The mudrās of forms
tsuktor nampargyalma yi
Uṣṇīṣavijayā
rigdzin shri'i singha la
Granted the accomplishment of ‘unchanging immutability’
mingyur takpé ngödrub tsal
To the vidyādhara Śrī Siṃha.
chimé yishyin khorlo yi
The Wish-fulfilling Wheel of Immortality
lobpön chenpo bimalar
Bestowed the ‘supreme empowerment of vajra longevity’
dorjé tsé yi chokwang kur
On the great ācārya Vimalamitra.
tsedak gönpo yabyum gyi
The great protector, the Lord of Life with consort,
orgyen pema tötreng la
Conferred the empowerment of ‘no birth and death’
kye shi mepar wangkur tsé
On Orgyen Pema Thötreng.
yeshe lé dang jikten gyi
At that time, the entire ocean of wisdom and
chösung damchen gyatso kün
Worldly samaya-bound dharma protectors
kha la trin tar tib né kyang
Gathered like clouds in the sky.
ma ong jejuk rigdzin nam
At that time, did you not promise to protect
bu shyin kyongwar maché dam
The vidyādhara disciples of the future like your children?
dorjé tatsik deng gong la
Remember now your vajra pledge
döyön gyatsö torma dang
And accept the first portion of torma, an ocean of desirable qualities,
men rak pü kyi chöpa shyé
Of amṛta and of rakta, as an offering.
dü shyi barché ying su dok
Avert the obstacles of the four māras and send them into the dharmakāya,
zungdzin dra gek long du drol
Liberate into the vast expanse the enemy and the obstructing force of duality,
dewa chenpö yeshe kyi
And with the wisdom of great bliss
chimé drubpé trinlé dzö
Perform the activities that accomplish immortality.
samaya sarva karma kuru ho
samaya sarva karma kuru ho
Tenma Offering
Offer the nectar of rinse water to the tenmas.
hung, dü jor powa né dakpé
Hūṃ. Tenma sisters, protectresses of the Vajrayāna teachings,
dorjé tenkyong masing tsok
Who each rule two hours of every day,
shalchü dütsi di sol la
Accept this nectar of rinse water
bö kham dewé trinlé drub
And accomplish the activities that bring happiness to Tibet and Kham.
ma ma hring hring amrita pudza ho
mama hrīṃ hrīṃ amṛta pūja ho
Vajra Dance
Finally, to conclude, perform the vajra dance.
hung, dak tu tawé damsi pung
Hūṃ. The hosts of damsi demons—the view of ‘belief in a self’—
dakmé dorjé é ying nen
Are pressed into the triangular vajra space of selflessness,
namtar sum gyi dro dungpé
And pounded with the dance of the three liberations.
dü sum tsenma ying su yal
As a result, the characteristics of the things of the three times vanish into basic space!
sarva bighanen satom bhaya a a a
sarva vighnān stvaṃ bhaya a a a
Samaya. Seal. Seal. Seal.
III. Conclusion
1. Offering, Praise and Accomplishments
Present offering and praise, then receive the accomplishments as follows.
om, jetsün pakma tsé yi dak
Oṃ. Sublime Lady, Possessor of Longevity,
rik kyi tsombu trulkhor ché
Together with the retinue of family assemblies that you emanate,
kyemé chökü ngang nyi lé
Rūpakāyas who appear magically in any appropriate form to train beings
gang dul zuk kyi kur nangwé
From within the dharmakāya beyond arising,
tukjé tukdam dü la bab
Now is the time for your samaya of great compassion!
gyurmé ku yi kyilkhor né
From the maṇḍala of the unchanging body
dorjé tsé yi ngödrub tsol
Grant us the siddhi of vajra longevity!
gakmé sung gi kyilkhor né
From the maṇḍala of unceasing speech
mishik tsé yi ngödrub tsol
Grant us the siddhi of indestructible life!
trulmé tuk kyi kyilkhor né
From the maṇḍala of undeluded wisdom mind
ösal tsé yi ngödrub tsol
Grant us the siddhi of a life of clear light!
samyé yönten kyilkhor né
From the maṇḍala of unfathomable enlightened qualities
döjung tsé yi ngödrub tsol
Grant us the siddhi of a life for accomplishing all we envision!
tokmé trinlé kyilkhor né
From the maṇḍala of unimpeded enlightened activities
gang dul tsé yi ngödrub tsol
Grant us the siddhi of a life to train beings as required!
tünmong lé shyi ngödrub tsol
Grant us the siddhi of the four ordinary activities!
khyepar wang chü ngödrub tsol
In particular, grant us the accomplishment of the ten powers!5
lamé chok gi ngödrub tsol
And grant us the unparalleled, supreme accomplishment!
om taré tuttaré turé hrih droom benza jnana ayukhé soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture hrīḥ bhrūṃ vajra jñāna ayuṣe svāhā
kaya waka tsita guna karma sarva siddhi pala ho
kāya vāk citta guṇa karma sarva siddhi phala ho
2. Confession
Second, request forgiveness for all accumulated mistakes.
ho, jetsün pakmé kyilkhor du
Hoḥ. In the maṇḍala of the Sublime Lady,
chö dang tingdzin trinlé sok
All mistakes of not performing correctly
tsulshyin ma gyi nongpa kün
Offerings, samādhis, activities and so on,
ösal nyukmé ngang du shak
We confess in the state of innate luminosity.
a a a
a a a
3. Dissolution
Third, dissolution of the maṇḍala.
a, rigpa rangnang damtsikpa
A. The samayasattvas, rigpa’s natural display,
rangjung yeshe ying kyi long
Are of one taste, beyond any possible separation or reunion,
dudral mepar rochik chir
Within the expanse of the basic space of self-arising primordial wisdom,
shyal chak tsenma ying su tim
So all their features, like face and hands, dissolve into all-pervading space.
a a a
a a a
4. Reappearance
Fourth, the conduct in post-meditation that you should nurture.
tam, lar yang kha lé jatsön tar
Tāṃ. Once again, like a rainbow appearing in the sky,
daknyi chimé pakmé ku
I arise in the form of the Lady of Immortality;
nang drak tok sum lha dang ngak
Appearances, sounds and thoughts,
yeshe chenpö rolpar shar
Arise as deity and mantra, and the play of great wisdom.
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
5. Dedication
Fifth, the dedication of merit.
ho, döné dakpé yeshe dang
Hoḥ. The accumulations of the wisdom of primordial purity,
ten ching drel jung sönam tsok
And the accumulation of merit based on interdependent origination,
zungjuk düma jépé long
I dedicate within the space of the essence of enlightenment,
changchub nyingpö ying su ngo
The uncompounded expanse in which the the two accumulations are indivisible.
6. Aspiration Prayer
Sixth, the aspiration prayer.
di né kyewa tamché du
From now on and in all my lives,
pakma chok gi jezung né
May I always be in your care, exalted Lady,
tsé dang yeshe ngödrub kyi
And with the siddhis of longevity and wisdom,
rangshyen dön nyi lhündrub shok
May I spontaneously accomplish all that truly benefits myself and others.
7. Prayer of Auspiciousness
Seventh, repeat words of auspiciousness.
om, gong da nyen gyü rig tsal chang
Oṃ. Holders of the dynamic energy of awareness in the mind-direct, symbolic, and aural lineages,
rigdzin lamé tashi shok
Vidyādhara gurus, let auspiciousness abound!
rabjam shyitröi chakgyar nang
You who appear in infinite mudrās of peaceful and wrathful deities,
yidam lha yi tashi shok
Yidam deities, let auspiciousness abound!
naljor drok dzé dechen pel
You who assist the yogis in increasing great bliss,
chi nang kandröi tashi shok
Outer and inner ḍākinīs, let auspiciousness abound!
lek nyé tang dzin barché sel
You who judge good and bad and dispel obstacles,
chö sung gyatsöi tashi shok
Ocean of dharma protectors, let auspiciousness abound!
nékab nam shyii trinlé kyi
May all be auspicious for the short-term activities of four types
dön nyi tarchin tashi shok
To fulfil the twofold benefit,
tartuk chimé yeshe ku
While ultimately, may all be auspicious for the direct experience
ngönsum druppé tashi shok
Of the immortal wisdom body.
Scatter flowers in all directions as you recite this prayer.
Then celebrate, and increase the two accumulations.
Samaya. Seal. Seal. Seal.

O wonder! This path of activities that uncover primordial wisdomOf the Sublime Lady of Immortality,
Which is the ultimate intent in the wisdom mind Of the three accomplished masters,I,
Padmasambhava, have taughtFor the sake of the fortunate in the future.
Few in words, this teaching is complete and its blessing great. All who practise it will see,
on an immediate level,Their obstacles pacified, as their life and merit increase, While
insight into the profound meaning will arise unrestrainedly, And the treasuries of an infallible
memory and clairvoyance will open. Seven days of diligent practice Will be enough to
avert untimely death, without fail. Ultimately, the Sublime Lady will take you into her
care and, Having swiftly progressed through the experiences of the paths and bhūmis, You will
attain enlightenment in one lifetime. This is what will happen to the fortunate practitioner.
That is why I have given this teaching, the quintessence of the profound sealed instructions,
To you, the sovereign father and son,6And the subjects and friend—five in all.7Conceal it
in the expanse of the great bindu, For the benefit of future generations.When the time is
ripe and the auspicious interdependent circumstances come together, May it appear and benefit
others on a vast scale! Samaya. Seal. Seal. Seal. Guhya. Let the signs be absorbed.

| Translated by Gyurme Avertin with the help of Khenpo Yeshe Dorje, Yongdzin Khen Rinpoche Yeshe
Gyaltsen, and Orgyen Tobgyal Rinpoche, and edited by Janine Schulz, 2015. First published
on Lotsawa House, 2021.
↑ Skt. śilājit; Tib. drak shyün (brag zhun), often translated as bitumen. This is a medicinal
substance obtained from caves where it is said to melt or drip from the rocks. It has been
used since ancient times in Ayurveda and Tibetan medicine, often in connection with rejuvenating
practice or medication.↑  In other words, the five female buddhas.↑ Orgyen Tobgyal
Rinpoche explains that the vajra rakṣa is, in a drupchen, the person who determines the
twelve moments of day and night connected with the nyulé spirits and repels their obstructions.
At these times also, the practitioners should invoke the descent of blessings. Here
the Chimé Pakmé Nyingtik makes reference to this announcement of dawn.↑ At the time of the
tsok, the Secret Mantra activities are singing vajra songs, performing vajra dances, and
so on.↑ In other words, the attainment of enlightenment.↑ i.e., Trisong Deutsen and Gyalse
Lharjé.↑ That is, Vairotsana, Nupchen Sangyé Yeshé, Gyalwa Chokyang and Namkhé Nyingpo,
plus the 'friend', or companion, Yeshe Tsogyal.