Brief Supplementary Text for Intensive Practice (Drupchö) of the Sublime Lady of Immortality
(Chimé Pakmé Nyingtik)
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Namo gurvī-tārā-cintācakrāyai!1
When performing intensive practice2 of the Sublime Lady of Immortality,3 there are the preparations,
the main part, and the conclusion.
1. Preparations
For the first, there is the preparation of the deity and the preparation of the vase.
1. Preparation of the Deity
First go to a pure, auspicious, and blessed place. Then, during an excellent time, for example
when the sun is moving north4 on the 8th day of the waxing moon, gather the following articles
and ornaments. A representation of the deity, such as a painting [that is a support
for your] samayas. In front of that place the daily offerings of the two waters and the
five sense offerings, and the ambrosia,5 torma, and rakta for the self-visualization. You
can place them wherever is convenient.
In the middle of a small stand covered with a cloth, arrange a precious maṇḍala with scented
drops and then place heaps of flowers or white grains. This maṇḍala represents the main deity
and her retinue, and should thus consist of nine heaps; a large heap in the centre, four
slightly smaller heaps in the four directions, and on the outside of each of those four
heaps, place a small heap (making four small heaps in total). In front or behind, wherever
is convenient, place the ambrosia, torma, and rakta, and the two waters and the five sense
offerings, arranged clockwise. Also gather the white preliminary torma6 and anything else
you might need.
Then start with the seven-line prayer and the lineage prayers, followed by the self-visualization
based on the daily practice. Start with taking refuge and recite all the way through,
up to and including the mantra recitation. Then arrange a white torma and a golden drink.7
Cleanse, purify, and bless them, invite the guests, and recite the mantras as usual. Request
them to perform their activities with the verse starting with:
gangdak dir né lha dang lu
All those who dwell in this place—gods and nāgas,
nöjin sinpo am shyendak la
Yakṣas, rākṣasas, and others—
kyilkhor döndu sachok di
For the sake of this maṇḍala, in this place,
dak shyu khyé kyi tsal du sol
I pray: please grant us the space!
With this, the ritual for requesting the use of the land is complete.
Then bless the offerings according to the main sādhana. Purify the heaps [representing the maṇḍala]
with the activity mantra.
om benza amrita kundali hana hana hung pé
oṃ vajrāmṛta-kuṇḍali hana hana hūṃ phaṭ
Purify with:
om sobhava shuddha sarva dharma sobhava shuddho hang
oṃ svabhāva śuddhāḥ sarvadharmāḥ svabhāva śuddho ‘haṃ
tongpé ngang lé dün gyi ten
Out of emptiness arises the front visualization.
jung nga yum gyi khalong du
Within the expanse of the five elements—the five consorts—
norbu chushel...
Stands the celestial mansion of great liberation, formed of precious crystal...etc.
Generate the samayasattva according to the activity manual.8 Dissolve the wisdom deity, perform
the homage, and continue as usual, up to and including the offerings and praise.
Kneel, and while holding vajra, bell, and incense, with hands folded together, pray in the following
way:
om, sangye tamché kyepé yum
Oṃ! Deities of the maṇḍala of Immortal Tārā,
chimé drolmé lhatsok nam
Mother of all the buddhas,
ngön gyi tukdam chenpo yi
Please remember the sacred pledge you took earlier
dak la gongpar dzé du sol
And think of me!
rigpa dzinpa dak gi ni
I, a vidyādhara,
yojé nampa tamchépé
By using all the various substances,
dewé longchö rabjar té
Will enjoy the wealth of great bliss,
lhanam yongsu chöpa dang
And thus make offerings to the deities.
nöden nam la pendak chir
For the benefit of beings
ngak kyi chogé tab chenpö
I will accomplish the maṇḍala of the essence
nyingpö kyilkhor drubpa dang
Through the great method of this mantric ritual
rangshyen dön kün gyi tsal na
When beseeching you to accomplish the benefit of myself and others,
yeshe nyingjé chenpo yi
Through your great wisdom and compassion,
zöpar dzé dé nang né kyang
Bear with me and accomplish it!
nöchü chimé drolma yi
Please grant your blessings so I may realize
dorjé sum dang yermé par
The world and all beings
jingyi labpar dzé du sol
As indivisible from the three vajras of Immortal Tārā!
Through this prayer, the deities are utterly delighted, and they grant permission by saying:
‘You, a vidyādhara, may perform whichever of the maṇḍala’s activities is appropriate!’ They
dissolve in the place of practice, which then blazes with wisdom’s extraordinary splendour.
After visualizing this, dissolve the maṇḍala and clean up the heaps that represent it.
2. Preparation of the Vase
Arrange two precious vases, ornamented and with a ribbon tied around the neck, filled with scented
water and containing the twenty-five vital essences. Also arrange a conch and a dhāraṇi-cord,
and new offerings in the same way as before. You may also simply replenish the
offerings that are already present.
Cleanse with:
om benza amrita kundali hana hana hung pé
oṃ vajrāmṛta-kuṇḍali hana hana hūṃ phaṭ
And purify with:
om sobhava shuddha sarva dharma sobhava shuddho hang
oṃ svabhāva śuddhāḥ sarvadharmāḥ svabhāva śuddho ‘haṃ
tongpé ngang lé pé dé teng
From the state of emptiness, upon a lotus and moon disk,
khadok ngaden yigé droom
Arises a five-coloured syllable bhrūṃ,
yong gyur chi ni rinpoche
Which transforms into an excellent vase,
rangshyin bumpa zangpo ché
Its exterior made from precious jewels,
tsennyi yongdzok ö du bar
Perfect in its design, and blazing with light.
nang ni lhatsok shyukpé né
Inside, the deities abide
rinchen shyalmé khang chenpor
In a vast, immeasurable palace made of jewels.
ü su pema dab shyi teng
In its centre, on a four-petalled lotus, are…etc.
Follow the activity manual, and continue with inviting the wisdom deity, requesting to remain,
offering homage, and making offerings and praise. Then recite the following:
bum nang pakmé tukka ru
Inside the vase, in the heart of the Noble Lady,
yeshe sempa tsepakmé
Is the wisdom being9 Amitāyus.
karsal nyamshyak tsebum dzin
He is brilliant white and holds a long-life vase, in the mudrā of meditative equipoise,
dar dang rinchen gyen gyi dzé
And is adorned with silks and jewelled ornaments.
dorjé kyiltrung pé dar shyuk
He is seated resplendently in vajra posture upon a lotus and moon-disc seat
ö dang özer trowa yi
Amidst radiating rays of light.
tuk ü chukyé nyidé ü
In the centre of his heart is a lotus, sun, and moon-disc seat,
tam tar ngak kyi trengwé kor
Upon which is tāṃ encircled by the mantra garland.
depé tukdam gyü kul té
Reciting the mantra evokes his wisdom mind,
ö kyi nangwa tayepa
Causing a stream of boundless light to burst out
tsuktor norbü tsé né tön
From the tip of the uṣṇīṣa’s jewel.
dé lé pakma nampargyal
From it appears the sublime Vijayā,
chushel dokchen chak yé kyi
The colour of crystal.
kyabjin chakgyé chakkyu dang
Her right hand holds an iron hook with the gesture of granting refuge,
yönpé chokjin tsebum nam
And her left holds a long-life vase with the gesture of supreme giving.
ö dang özer dang chepa
Along with brilliant rays of light,
drangmé nyizer dul tar trö
Limitless forms of herself stream out like specks of dust in sunlight.
rang gi tuk né ngak kyi treng
From my heart the mantra garland flows
dorjé zung tak lé gyü dé
Through the dhāraṇī-cord,
bum lhé tukdam gyü kulwé
Which invokes the wisdom minds of the deities of the vase.
detong rolpé özer trin
Clouds of light rays—the play of bliss and emptiness—
khakhyab küntu nangwa yi
Completely illuminate the whole of space,
pak chö drowé dön kün drub
Make offerings to the noble ones, and fulfil all beings’ aims.
tsur dü tuk kyi dangwar khyil
Gathering back, they coil around the vital essence of her heart.
ku dang ngak lé dütsi gyün
From her body and the mantra, a boundless flow of ambrosia
pakmé jung né bumpé chü
Gushes forth and transforms the contents of the vase
ngödrub kün gyi nyingpor gyur
Into the essence of all accomplishments.
Clearly visualize like this. Take hold of the dhāraṇī-cord, and recite the mantra of the three
main deities and the combined mantra10 at least three hundred times, the mantras of the
four activity Tārās about one hundred times each, and the mantras of the four gatekeeper
Tārās at least twenty-one times. At the end, offer the water of the conch with:
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
lhatsok dewa chenpö ngowor ö du shyuwé chimé tsé dang yeshe kyi ngödrub terwé dorjé dütsi chugyün
du gyur
The deities —the essence of great bliss— dissolve into light and become a stream of vajra-ambrosia
that grants the accomplishments of immortal life and primordial wisdom.
lé bum nang du pé nyi teng
In the activity vase on a lotus and sun-disc
pema tamdrin kudok mar
Is Padma Hayagrīva, red in colour.
chak nyi pema drilbu dzin
He has two hands which hold a lotus and bell,
durtrö ché dzok dortab shyuk
Is adorned with all the charnel ground ornaments, and stands in striding posture.
ku lé dorjé dütsi gyün
From his body flows a stream of vajra-ambrosia,
babpé bumpa gangwar gyur
Which fills the vase.
om hrih padmantakrita sarva bighanen hana hana hung pé
oṃ hrīḥ padmāntakṛta sarva-vighnān hana hana hūṃ phaṭ
Recite this 108 times.
pal trowö gyalpo tamdrin gyi wangkur gyi jawa ma drub kyi bardu barchö kyi gek tamché dokpé
trinlé dzé du sol
Hayagrīva, glorious king of wrathful ones, please enact your activity of averting all obstacle-making
demons until the activities of granting empowerments has been accomplished!
Entrust the activity like this. Now gather the empowerment substances, such as an image or other
representation of enlightened body, the empowerment images,11 the crown, vajra and bell,
and ambrosia.
wang dzé nam ngowo nampar dakpa chö kyi ying rangshyin yeshe kyi nangwa chiryang charwé jinlab
dang ngödrub jungwé yik tu gyur
Imagine that the empowerment substances transform into wisdom appearances which have the nature
of the completely pure essence, the basic space of phenomena, and become like a jewel
that grants accomplishment and blessing.
This concludes the preparations.
2. Main Part
During the main part of the intensive practice, divide the maṇḍala house with the following
mantra:
droom bisho bishuddhé | tam hrih droom | tam droom hrih hung | dza hung bam ho | pé dza
bhrūṃ viśva vishuddhe | tāṃ hrīḥ bhrūṃ | tāṃ bhrūṃ hrīḥ hūṃ | jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ | phaṭ jaḥ
Visualize that the maṇḍala of the self-visualization, both surroundings and deities, divides,
and in the space in front arises the maṇḍala of the front-visualization, like one candle
lighting another, with rings of fire-mountains at the edges of the maṇḍalas just touching
each other. Then do the mantra recitation.
3. Conclusion
The visualization for receiving the accomplishments is as follows. First divide the maṇḍala
with this mantra.
droom bisho bishuddhé | om taré tuttaré turé sarva mandala | pé dza
bhrūṃ viśva vishuddhe | oṃ tāre tuttāre ture sarva-maṇḍala | phaṭ jaḥ
rang gi tukka né özer marpo trö
From my heart radiate red rays of light,
kyilkhor gyi lhatsok nam kyi tukgyü kul
Invoking the wisdom minds of the deities.
dé lé özer sam gyi mi khyabpa trö
From them, inconceivable rays of light burst forth
khordé kyi dangchü tamché dü té kyilkhorpé tukkar tim
And gather the vital essences of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, which dissolve into the deities' hearts.
ngödrub tsolwa la ngön du chokpé yeshe kyi zijin bar shyin shyukpar gyur
The deities are about to grant the accomplishments, and remain ablaze with wisdom’s splendour.
Then recite the following mantra as much as you can:
om taré tuttaré turé hrih droom benza jnana ayukhé soha | om ah hung soha | mum lam mam pam
tam | sarva tathagata ayujnana maha punyé tishta om | kaya waka tsitta guna karma sarva siddhi
pala ho
oṃ āḥ hūṃ svāhā | mūṃ lāṃ māṃ pāṃ tāṃ | tāre tutāre tūre sarva-tathāgata āyurjñāna māha-puṇye
tiṣhṭha oṃ | kāya vāka citta guna karma sarva-siddhi phala hoḥ
Now comes invoking the accomplishments. Should you wish to be concise, simply follow the main
practice text. To elaborate slightly, perform the following invocation from The Completely
Perfect Immortal Heart Essence.12
hrih, rangjung önang chok chü kyilkhor khyab
Hrīh! Naturally arising light suffuses the maṇḍalas of the ten directions
mingyur tsé yi ngödrub malü dü
And gathers all the accomplishments of unchanging life.
dütsi rangshyin ngödrub dzé la tim
They dissolve into the accomplishment substances, which have the nature of ambrosia,
yeshe sönam tsé yi gyatsor khyil
And swirl in an ocean of wisdom, merit, and longevity.

hrih, chimé dorjé kyilkhor malüpa
Hrīh! All the immortal vajra-maṇḍalas
shyendu mi shyuk rang gi ying su sal
Are found nowhere but in your own basic space.
marik khorwé mün trö lé drol té
Having been liberated from the darkness of samsāra’s ignorance,
dakpa yeshe gochen rangsar jé
The great door of immaculate wisdom opens in its own place.
chönyi dakpé kyareng dangpor shar
At first the pure dharmatā dawns;
nyamnang gong du pelwé namyang lang
Then the daylight of increase in experience breaks;
rigpa tsé la pebpé nyima shar
And the sun of awareness reaching full maturity arises;
namtok chidak münpa kün zé né
Finally, when the darkness of conceptual thoughts, the Lord of Death, is completely exhausted
yeshe nangwa pelwé drang dzokpé
The increase of wisdom appearances is perfected.
danta nyi du ngödrub tsal du sol
This very moment, grant us accomplishment!
dani nang ying chenpor yermé par
Now, lead me into the great inner space indivisible from
chöying kunzang gyalsa chenpor juk
The dharmadhātu, the great kingdom of Samantabhadra.
ku nga lhün gyi drubpé wangchen kur
Bestow the great empowerment of the spontaneously present five kāyas.
yönten mizé gyen gyi ngödrub tsol
Bestow the accomplishment of the ornament of inexhaustible qualities.
rimé gyalwé trinlé kün la khyab
Make the unbiased activities of the victorious ones spread far and wide,
gyünché mepé dro dön lhün gyi drub
And spontaneously accomplish the benefit of beings, without interruption!
Then recite the invoking accomplishments section from the main text.
Finally, recite a light aspiration prayer13 in the usual way, or, preferably, recite the one
from the Heart Essence of Immortality itself.
Aspiration Prayer
hung, ngowo rangshyin tukjé kyilkhor du
Hūṃ! In this maṇḍala of the essence, nature, and compassion,
tsétayé ngö lamé u zung né
Headed by the teacher, Amitāyus in person,
lugu gyü du drelwé checham nam
We remain connected with our spiritual siblings.
mindral drokpé tingdzin tsechik gi
With this samādhi of one-pointed accompaniment,
nangsal marmé di yi tsön né kyang
Exemplified by this illuminating candlelight,
yeshe drönmé tong tsa sharwé tü
And through the strength of a thousand wisdom lights,
marik münpé nang du mi khyam shing
May we not stray into the darkness of ignorance.
chidak chenzen dukpé ké mi tö
May we never hear the cry of the vicious beast of the Lord of Death.
nyönmong duk nga dangwa kün sol la
Having dispelled all risings of the five poisonous emotions,
khorwa kyechi trang la drim drab tsé
When we are about to wander in the abyss of saṃsāra—life and death—
yeshe drönmé tukjé der ma chung
May your lamp of wisdom and compassion be not weak.
tsélam pemachen gyi natri né
May Pemachen lead us along the path of longevity,
chimé pakmé tsok kyi tsé tsol la
The hosts of Immortal Ladies grant us long life,
tsedak yabyum nam kyi sok ten chik
And the Lord of Life and his consort stabilize our life-force.
wangchen tamdrin gyalpö barché sol
May the mighty king Hayagrīva remove all obstacles,
gyok machöpé lhamö ta né kyong
And the swift offering goddesses protect us all around.
ösal nang shyi rimpar drö né kyang
Gradually traversing the four visions of luminosity,
chimé dorjé ku ru drubpar shok
May we attain the immortal vajra body!

This supplementary text for intensive practice was compiled by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö.

| Translated by Han Kop, 2020, with many thanks to Khenpo Tashi from Namdroling for his clarifications.
Verses from The Completely Perfect Immortal Heart Essence adapted from a translation
by Steve Cline.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "'chi med 'phags ma'i sgrub mchod skabs kyi zur rgyan/"
in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012.
W1KG12986 Vol. 5: 519–527
↑ This form of White Tārā is called Cintāmaṇicakrā, ‘Wish-Fulfilling Wheel’.↑ Drupchö (sgrub
mchod).↑ Chime Pakme Nyingtik (’chi med ’phags ma’i snying thig).↑ This means the period
after the winter solstice, when the days become longer again.↑ Skt. amṛta↑ Tib. Kator↑ Tib.
serkyem↑ The Light of Wisdom.↑ Skt. Jñānasattva.↑ Literally ‘the mantra with the longevity
mantra attached’↑ Tib. tsakli↑ yongs rdzogs 'chi med snying thig, from the Chokling Tersar.↑
Tib. marme mönlam (mar me smon lam).