Introduction to Chimé Pakmé Nyingtik

by Gyurme Avertin

Chimé Pakmé Nyingtik (‘chi med ‘phags ma’i snying thig), The Heart Essence of the Sublime Lady
of Immortality, is among the most famous and revered termas of Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo
(1820–1892). Its power and blessings are such that several of Khyentse Wangpo’s foremost students,
including Jamgön Kongtrul Lodrö Taye (1813–1899) and the Fourteenth and Fifteenth
Karmapas, were able to remove obstacles to their longevity and activities. According to prophecy,
had it not been for this practice, the life of Jamgön Kongtrul would have been fraught
with obstacles and much shorter. More recently, Chimé Pakmé Nyingtik was a central practice
for such prominent figures as Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö (1893–1959), Dudjom Rinpoche
(1904–1987), Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche (1910–1991) and Trulshik Rinpoche (1924–2011),
and it is also said to be the heart practice of His Holiness Sakya Gongma Trichen Rinpoche.


The Chimé Pakmé Nyingtik cycle is a mind treasure (dgongs gter) revealed by Jamyang Khyentse
Wangpo in 1855. Just before dawn, one morning, Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo had a vision of White
Tārā, the Wish-Fulfilling Wheel, while meditating upon her. She dissolved into him, inducing
a profound experience. When he arose, Śrī Siṃha, Vimalamitra and Guru Rinpoche, three
masters who attained the vidyādhara level of power over life, appeared to him and through
their combined blessings the entire Chimé Phakmé Nyingtik entered his wisdom mind “as
clearly and distinctly as a reflection in a mirror”. Khyentse Wangpo then transcribed the
sādhana with help from Vimalamitra who checked the manuscript.

Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo’s biography states that he did not transcribe the entire cycle of Chimé
Pakmé Nyingtik but only the root sādhana as well as the sādhana and instruction cycle
known as Vima Ladrup (bi ma'i bla sbrub, The Guru Sādhana of Vimalamitra) and that of White
Tārā, Amitāyus and Uṣṇīṣayavijayā. Then for five years Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo practised
these teachings in complete secrecy before transmitting them.

Chimé Pakmé Nyingtik combines the practice of the three deities of long life, White Tārā, Amitāyus
and Uṣṇīṣayavijayā. Another of its special features is its highly unusual form of deity
union, with the female White Tārā as the main deity and the male Gargyi Wangchuk as her
consort.

Further Reading

Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo, Jamgon Kongtrul Lodro Taye, Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche, Jamyang Khyentse
Chökyi Lodrö, & Tulku Orgyen Tobgyal. Sublime Lady of Immortality: Teachings on Chimé Phakmé
Nyingtik. Hong Kong: Rangjung Yeshe Publications, 2021