The Sweet Ambrosia of Immortality

Concise Instructions on the Generation and Completion Phases of the Single-Form Daily Practice
of the Heart Essence of the Sublime Lady of Immortality

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Namo Guru Ārya Tārāyai![1]

Noble Lady, the merest recollection of whomBrings the accomplishment of perfect longevity,Blessed
One, ‘Wish-fulfilling Wheel’,Inseparable from the guru, grant auspiciousness!

Your sādhana, oral instructions from the great master of Oḍḍiyāna,Is a treasure which arose
from the dark casket of the profound expanseOf the wisdom mind of Ösal Trulpe Dorje.[2]This
heart essence of the Noble Lady, I shall now explain in stages.

Among the various kama and terma teachings on the immortal White Tārā, Wish-Fulfilling Wheel,
bestower of longevity, which originate with accomplished ācāryas, here we are concerned
with the essence of the wisdom mind of the master of Oḍḍiyāna, knower of the three times,
a profound mind treasure of Pema Ösal Dongak Lingpa, the teaching of the Heart Essence of
the Sublime Lady of Immortality, which is a profound and vast dharma cycle. Here I shall explain
in stages the instructions on the unelaborate Single-Form Daily Practice, which is
the essence and distillation of the sādhana Light of Wisdom. This will consist of preliminaries,
main part and concluding stages.

1. The Preliminaries

This section includes: 1. the preliminaries to the session and 2. the preliminaries to the commentary.

1. The Preliminaries to the Session

Sit on a comfortable seat in the seven-point posture of Vairocana. The crucial point of speech
is to allow the circulating wind-energies to settle in their natural place. Expel any stale
wind-energy from the right and left nostrils in turn, and then both at the same time,
nine or three times. This will separate the pure and impure distillates of the wind-energies.
Then, rest for a while. This preparation will make you a suitable vessel for meditative
concentration.

In the space before you appears Buddha Amitābha, indivisible from your root guru. He is in nirmāṇakāya
attire and his two hands rest in the posture of meditative equipoise, holding an
alms-bowl filled with the ambrosia of immortality. He is seated upon a lotus and moon-disk
seat. With ardent devotion and fervent longing, recite the following prayers at least three
times:

Glorious root guru…[3]

And:

Essence of the buddhas, of past, present and future, precious guru, to you I pray:Inspire me
with your blessings;Grant your blessings, so the extraordinary realization of the profound
path is born in me;Grant your blessings, so that I may, in this life, attain the immortal
wisdom kāya!

At the end, imagine that the guru melts into light and dissolves into you. Leave your mind in
a state free of grasping, clear yet empty. When thoughts suddenly arise, do not indulge
them, but apply the relevant visualizations, as explained in this commentary. It is crucial
that all the stages outlined below are preceded by what has been explained here.

2. The Preliminaries to the Commentary

This has two parts: 1. the common preliminaries, and 2. the uncommon preliminaries.

1. The Common Preliminaries

The profound treasure text Vajra Verses of Tārā says:

In an isolated and pleasant place
Inspire yourself with strong renunciation.[4]

At first, exert yourself only in the methods that inspire renunciation and the wish to be liberated
from saṃsāra. Contemplate the following: whether you are born in higher or lower realms,
you will never escape the three kinds of suffering and not enjoy even so much as a
hair’s breadth of happiness. Furthermore, if you are reborn in any of the three lower realms,
you will experience unbearable suffering. If you cannot endure even a single day of intense
heat, cold or hunger right now, how will you possibly cope with the suffering of the
lower realms?

If you take birth in one of the three higher realms and are unable to remove ignorance, the
cause of saṃsāra, you might for a while experience a tiny amount of defiled happiness. Yet
that semblance of happiness is itself a cause for experiencing only suffering. When you realize
how you will naturally sink lower and lower, you will be overcome with sadness. Throughout
time without beginning until now, you have wandered in these realms. Yet still, the
actions of your body, speech and mind are mostly negative and non-virtuous. It is certain,
therefore, that when you die, you will immediately go to the lower realms. The Thus-Gone
One has said that whatever actions you have done will not go to waste, and that you will
never experience the karma of things you have not done. You are the sole recipient of the
ripening of your actions, which cannot be transferred to someone else. As there can be no
washing away or avoiding what you have done, you must experience the intense ripening of
karma for a long time. As a result of some slight virtuous action, you might be reborn in
the higher realms, yet even as a human, you will still experience the suffering of birth,
old age, sickness and death, and if you are reborn as a god, you will experience the suffering
of death, transmigration and fall. In the upper realms, you might remain in meditation
for a long time, yet when that mind is exhausted you won’t escape the fall to lower states,
which means you must experience continual suffering. From now on, therefore, adopt only
virtuous actions and avoid what is unvirtuous.

You must immediately devote yourself to practice, right now! Postponing it until tomorrow or
the day after will be to no avail. Your life is as impermanent as bubbles on water, as susceptible
to momentary change as a candle in the wind, as transient and unstable as clouds
in the sky, liable to disappear at any moment. The outer world, too, is always changing,
with the arrival and passing of the four seasons. And beings within it, regardless of their
status, lead uncertain lives. There is no escaping the fact that the time of death is uncertain,
conditions that lead to death are uncertain, and everyone is certain to die. When
you experience the suffering of death, your strength, wealth, family, looks or possessions,
however excellent they might be, will be of no help at all: you alone must experience this
suffering.

The suffering of fear in the intermediate state is inconceivable: undirected, you will have
no control over where you might be reborn or where you might go. Even your cherished body
must be left behind, and when you die and go on to the next world, your only refuge and protection
will be the sacred Dharma. Not to practice but to procrastinate and fail to strive
at this very moment to practice the divine, sacred Dharma would be to deceive yourself,
foolishly, as if a mighty demon had entered your heart. So do not cheat yourself but look
after your own best interests through the sacred and divine sun of Dharma.

The perfect support for practicing the divine Dharma is to have a body complete with the eighteen
freedoms and advantages. If you possess such a support, it is because you have accumulated
good deeds in the past. But be sure not to lose this valuable asset, for you will not
find such an excellent support again, even among the gods, much less anywhere else, and
even the supposedly great loss of a few prized possessions would be nothing in comparison.


The support of this body makes it possible to secure lasting happiness. Just look at the life
stories of the buddhas and bodhisattvas and the scholars and adepts of the past. It could
also lead to ruin in this life and the next. Look at the stories of wrongdoers reborn in
the hell realms. This marks a crossroads, the point at which you could go up or down, so
do not lose sight of what will work out well or badly, and do not fall prey to mistaken ideas
or flawed advice.

Now that you have found the jewel of the freedoms and advantages, do not squander them, but
strive with enormous effort, physically, verbally and mentally, in order to make the most
of them. The focus of your energy should be the sacred Dharma, the nectar that dispels all
the various faults of existence and quiescence, the great medicine that cures the chronic
illness of saṃsāra. Yet this cannot be understood through your own ingenuity; you must rely
on the condition of an authentic spiritual friend and serve him or her with the three means
of gratification[5] and by carrying out every command. With the devotion of seeing everything
the teacher does as authentic, preserve the life-force of the path. Do not disregard
what issues from the excellent vase of the teacher’s mouth, but with devoted application,
continuous application, and strong, insatiable diligence, practice until your mind turns
towards the Dharma, the Dharma progresses on the path, the path pacifies confusion, and
deluded perceptions dawn as wisdom. Think: ‘O guru, grant me such ability. Three Jewels,
care for me! Let me attain such ability! Inspire me with your blessings so that I become just
so!’ With thoughts such as these, generate strong renunciation, like the flow of a river.
When you arise from your session, dedicate the merit and carry out the activities of post-meditation,
while never losing your heartfelt renunciation. This also applies to everything
that follows.

2. The Uncommon Preliminaries

This has five parts: there are instructions on 1. taking refuge, 2. generating the mind set
upon supreme awakening, 3. purifying the unfavourable circumstances of negative actions and
obscurations, 4. gathering the favourable circumstances of the accumulations, 5. the blessings
of guru yoga.

The Vajra Verses say:

Take refuge, strive to purify and increase,Meditate on the blessing of guru yoga,Receive the
four empowerments, and blend mind and wisdom.

1. Taking Refuge

Imagine that your surroundings are like the blissful realm adorned with infinite clouds of excellent
offerings. In the space before you is a multi-coloured, hundred-thousand-petalled
lotus. At the height of its anther is a moon-disk seat, upon which your root guru sits in
the form of the Venerable Noble Lady, without consort. Consider that she is the embodiment
of all sources of refuge. In front of her, on a ground made of lapis lazuli, you and all
sentient beings take refuge with body, speech and mind in unison. Consider, with one-pointed
faith and devotion, that the guru’s body is the saṅgha, speech the sacred Dharma, and
mind the Buddha, and recite the following from the main text:

Namo! Until we attain enlightenment, I and all sentient beings…[6]

In each session, recite this a hundred or a thousand times, whichever you can manage, without
letting your mind be distracted. At the end of the session, rays of light stream from the
objects of refuge, striking you and all other sentient beings, purifying your negative actions,
obscurations and habitual tendencies, and transporting everyone to a pure realm. The
object of refuge, the Venerable Blessed One, melts into light, which has the nature of
the ambrosia of immortality, and dissolves into you. Imagine that the blessings of her three
secrets enter you. The nature of your mind has always been free from arising and ceasing;
it is the primordially deathless natural state. This is the true nature of the Venerable
Lady’s three secrets, and to maintain it is the absolute refuge of the way things abide.

2. Generating the Mind Set upon Supreme Awakening

Just as space is boundless in measure, there is no limit to the number of sentient beings. Each
of these limitless beings, moreover, has been our own father and mother more times than
could be measured even with the particles of the earth. Each time they were our father or
mother, they helped us in infinite ways and protected us from incalculable harm. Although
they showed us nothing but incredible kindness, their ignorance regarding the law of cause
and effect means that their actions conflict with their deepest desires. Think to yourself:
“I possess the necessary cause, a human body complete with the freedoms and advantages,
as well as the necessary condition of having met a spiritual friend. As this has nothing
to do with my own proverbial ‘masculine cunning’ or ‘feminine guile’, there could be no
greater shame than to fail to free these beings, my very own parents, from the cage of their
suffering. Thus, I shall do all that I can within this lifetime to liberate myself and
all other beings from the ocean of existence. To this end, I shall exert myself in the stages
of the path of the Great Vehicle, and especially the Vajrayāna, which brings liberation
in a single lifetime and is so rarely encountered throughout the past, present and future,
and specifically the quintessence of the infinite Mother Tantras of Unsurpassable Yoga,
the practice of the Venerable Noble Lady.” With such a motivation, recite the following:

Hoḥ! Sentient beings are as countless as space is vast…

Begin by meditating on your mother from this life and training your mind. The way to train the
mind is to generate love and compassion time and again. Until you are able to take your
mother’s suffering upon yourself, it is vitally important that you continue to train your
mind. Then, gradually, extend the meditation to include more and more sentient beings, until
finally you are able to meditate on all sentient beings who are as limitless as space.
Furthermore, it is crucial that your vow of aspirational bodhicitta remains extremely stable
and that you conduct yourself according to the six transcendent perfections, the precepts
of bodhicitta in action. When generating the mind set upon awakening, imagine that you
receive it from your guru, visualized as the object of refuge, who acts as witness.

Ordinarily, you would not dissolve the objects of refuge right away, but first generate the
mind set upon awakening and only then dissolve the field of refuge. Alternatively, you could
visualize rays of light emanating from the body of your guru, who is in the form of the
Venerable Lady; if you are feeling dull, consider that these rays dissolve at the point between
your eyebrows; if you are feeling agitated, consider that they dissolve at your navel;
and when your mind is balanced, consider that they dissolve into your heart; then, focus
on the brilliant white essence in your head, at your navel or at your heart and practice
calm abiding. Within that state, consider how all thoughts that grasp outwardly or cling
inwardly are insubstantial, do not leave any trace behind, and are like an illusion or a
dream. They lack true existence and transcend the extremes of singularity and plurality. To
see them vividly as the great union of clarity and emptiness is to see reality itself. Settle,
for as long as you can, in this meditative absorption of calm abiding and clear seeing.
By meditating on intense clarity in short sessions, many times over, the duration of
your sessions will gradually increase. This will happen automatically as the practice becomes
more familiar. This advice comes from the pith instructions of The Profound Essence of
Tārā.[7]

3. Purifying the Unfavourable Circumstances of Negative Actions and Obscurations

Although the visualization and recitation of Vajrasattva as a means of purifying negative actions
and obscurations is not included here, it may still be added based on other sources.


Although sentient beings are utterly pure by nature, they do not recognize this and wander in
saṃsāra as a result. The principal obscurations, which are brought about due to ignorance,
conceal reality but do not taint one’s basic nature and are only adventitious, which is
why they may be purified. There are countless methods of purification, but the greatest form
of activity among the skilful methods of Vajrayāna is to practise the yoga of the guru
as Vajrasattva. This constitutes the power of support. Feeling intense regret and remorse
for negative actions committed in the past constitutes the power of repentance. Purification
through the flow of ambrosia and recitation of mantra constitutes the antidotal power.
Resolving never to succumb to negative actions again in the future, even at the cost of one’s
life, constitutes the power of restraint. When these four powers are complete, all natural
and proscribed misdeeds and downfalls may be purified.

Here you may recite any appropriate text from a treasure revelation of similar type or use the
root text of The Heart of Blessings: A Practice of the Guru (Vima Ladrup),[8] which is
a branch of this very practice. Visualize Vajrasattva about one span above your head. Consider
that a stream of white ambrosia flows from the mantra garland at Guru Vajrasattva’s heart
and enters your brahma-aperture. It washes away all disease, which is expelled in the
form of black blood, all demons, which take the form of insects and other creatures, and
all negative actions and obscurations, which take the form of black smoke. They emerge from
your sense faculties and all the pores of your body, which is left cleansed and clear like
a sphere of crystal. The flow of ambrosia fills you completely and makes you entirely white.
Consider that, through this, the blessings of Guru Vajrasattva’s three secrets infuse
your being. Recite the hundred-syllable mantra as many times as you can. At the end, through
your confessions and pledges, Guru Vajrasattva confirms that all your negative actions
and obscurations have been purified. He melts into light and dissolves into you, through
which you sustain an experience of natural awareness, clarity and emptiness free from grasping,
which is the true face of the Vajrasattva of definitive meaning.

4. Gathering the Accumulations & 5. Guru Yoga

Here we combine the practices of gathering the accumulations and guru yoga, showing how they
can be practiced as a unity. For the outer practice of this Dharma cycle, it is crucially
important that the practices of gathering the accumulations and the guru yoga recitation
follow the Secret Path to Immortality, A Guru Yoga Based on the Three Deities of Longevity,[9]
composed by the Omniscient Guru [Khyentse Wangpo] himself, either in an elaborate or
concise way. Were I to explain this elaborately, I fear it would become too long-winded, so
I shall state only a few crucial points related to the guru yoga.

In general, the [Tibetan] word lama refers to what is unsurpassed. The Sanskrit word guru, which
means heavy, suggests being heavily laden with qualities. In reality, our guru, the glorious
protector, is certainly none other than the buddha himself. The guru might display
pure or impure appearances, but as is evident from the biographies of the accomplished adepts
of the past, the deeds of the buddhas and bodhisattvas cannot be judged based on ordinary
concepts of good or bad. Impure perception is similar to a bile disorder which causes
a white conch to appear yellow; it is our own impure mind that is at fault. If our mind is
impure, we will perceive even the likes of Buddha Śākyamuni as flawed. Therefore, any perceived
faults do not belong to the guru but only reflect our own shortcomings. We must consider
how the guru is equal to the buddhas in terms of qualities but greater than the buddha
in the matter of kindness. We must reflect again and again on this exceptional kindness.
For this, it is not enough to recall only the gifts and rewards that the guru lavished
upon us or words of praise and encouragement. It is most important to consider repeatedly
the kindness of bestowing the highest benefit and happiness both temporarily and ultimately.
This is a crucial point. How is this bestowed? By pointing out the co-emergent wisdom of
naturally arisen awareness.

The guru who points this out is one’s root guru. The deep connection that exists between you
and this guru is based on the following. In general, we are connected because all sentient
beings are one within the all-pervading space of reality and there is therefore no one with
whom we are unconnected. More specifically, in the past, when the precious guru was training
in bodhisattva conduct on the path of learning, we took on a form such as that of a
tiny insect and were touched by the guru’s shadow, or else we overheard a fragment of the
guru’s speech or were struck by a glimmering ray of the guru’s wisdom intent. Whichever the
case, from the moment this connection was first forged, whether directly or indirectly,
good or bad, the teacher became what is known as ‘a guru connected through past lifetimes’.
Moreover, just as all appearances are but our own perception, the guru, too, arises through
the pure perception within our own mind. The guru does not exist outside us; ultimately,
it is our own awareness that is the true guru. The expressive power of the appearance
quality of this awareness manifests externally, according to one’s mental capacity, as the
guru’s form body (rūpakāya). This also accounts for how the appearances of saṃsāra arise
to someone whose mind is disturbed by habitual tendencies, and how the experience of nirvāṇa
arises due to the gradual purification of delusion and the appearance quality of the wisdom
of great equalness, in which the two truths are indivisible. The arising of one’s own
mind as the guru is thus an especially crucial point.

With this understanding, follow the points of meditation provided in the recitation text. Purify
all phenomena into emptiness with the mantra, and generate therefrom the pure realm of
great bliss, in the centre of which, in the sky before you, your guru arises in naturally
abiding form as the essence of the three deities of immortal life. As a concise method of
gathering the accumulations, perform the visualization of the seven branches in the usual
way. You could also gather the accumulations by offering the maṇḍala a hundred thousand
times. Perform the recitation of invoking the guru’s sacred pledge and wisdom mind. Gather
and dissolve the vital elixir of longevity and consider that the ambrosia of longevity gradually
fills you, beginning at the point between your eyebrows, thereby conferring the four
empowerments. Repeat this visualization again and again. The guru melts into light and
dissolves into you, and you sustain an experience of wisdom intent, in which mind and wisdom
blended as one.

2. The Main Part: The Explanation of the Deity

This has three parts: 1. the explanation of enlightened body: the generation phase of the mudrā,
2. the explanation of enlightened speech: the mantra recitation, which is an aspect of
the generation phase, and 3. the explanation of enlightened mind: concise instructions on
the suchness of the completion phase.

1. The Explanation of Enlightened Body: The Generation Phase of the Mudrā

This has three parts: 1. expelling obstructive forces and visualizing the protective sphere,
2. blessing the offering substances, and 3. the actual meditation on the deity.

1. Expelling Obstructive Forces and Visualizing the Protective Sphere

Hūṃ is the syllable of non-duality beyond grasping, the life-force of the infinite bliss-gone
ones, peaceful and wrathful, and the awareness of the mudrā.[10] As you utter it, you transform
into the deity of the genuine nature, Lotus Heruka (Hayagrīva). His body is red, and
his two hands hold a lotus and a bell. His form is wrathful and fierce, and he is adorned
with the wrathful accoutrements. Imagine that hūṃ syllables shoot out from his nostrils.
They obliterate everything in the ten directions and emit sparks of fire, which incinerate
and destroy all obstructive forces. To subjugate thoughts associated with the three poisons
and the demons and obstructive forces that they engender melodiously recite three hūṃs,
the natural expression of the three kāyas. Obstructive forces are thereby expelled.

As the hūṃ syllables return, visualize the vajra sphere of protection while reciting the mantra.
Consider that the sphere’s vajra foundation is formed of tiny vajras, with any spaces
between them sealed with molten metal. The vajra fence is formed of horizontal and vertical
vajras and within it is the vajra tent, shaped like a helmet. At its single peak is the
top of a half-vajra. Within the space of the fence and tent descends the vajra canopy. On
the outside, the fence and tent are covered by a net of tiny interwoven vajras; in the middle
it is bound together with a chain of vajras. A ring of fire, resembling the burning coals
of a smith, blazes out limitlessly in all directions with such strength that it is impervious
to water from within or apocalyptic gales from without. This exceedingly robust,
formidable protection is utterly impenetrable to demons and obstructive forces alike. On an
ultimate level, to settle into the vast expanse of naturally arisen awareness, which has
never been tainted by the elaborations of self-centred thoughts and ideas, is the absolute
protection sphere.

2. Blessing the Offering Substances

Arrange outer and inner offerings, if you have them. If not, by understanding how all appearance
and existence are the mudrā of offering, imagine that everything is purified into emptiness
with oṃ, multiplied with āḥ, and transformed with hūṃ into outer, inner and secret
offering substances. Bless the offerings by reciting the mantra three times together with
the sky-treasury mudrā.

Taking refuge has as its objects of purification your own and all other beings’ adoption of
false paths, your failure to secure the protection of the Three Jewels, and your espousal
of false views, throughout beginningless time. The means of purification is to take refuge
authentically. The result of purification is to actualize awakening as an embodiment of the
three kāyas.

Generating the mind set upon awakening has as its objects of purification the fact that you
have entered the lesser vehicle, selfish concerns, anger towards others, and so on. They are
purified by this very means of purification (i.e., generating bodhicitta). The result of
purification is uninterrupted enlightened activity based on great, non-referential compassion.


Expelling negative forces and visualizing the protection sphere have as their objects of purification
all deluded thoughts that obscure the natural state, as well as the guardians of
the directions, the male and female haughty spirits that they engender, who are gathered
and overpowered. In particular, those who have not entered the Secret Mantra Vehicle, and
those who have entered it but have fallen into mistaken view and behaviour are eliminated
here. The practice itself brings about the purification, and the result of such purification
is the destruction of demonic forces when awakening is attained.

Blessing the offerings has as its objects of purification the perception of the world and its
inhabitants as ordinary and the impulsive consumption of sensory pleasures. Purification
is achieved through this [blessing of the offerings], and the result of such purification
is to experience the infinite display of primordial wisdom upon attainment of awakening.


Generally speaking, there are what are known as the four doors of secret mantra: 1) the door
of words as a reminder of the ultimate meaning, 2) the door of secret mantra as an invocation
of the wisdom mind, 3) the door of meditative concentration for single-pointed focus;
and 4) the door of the display [of deities] which represents the mudrā, symbols and signs.
As this suggests, your meditation needs to accord with the text that is recited. This is
crucially important at every stage above and below.

3. The Actual Meditation on the Deity

This has three parts: 1. visualizing the samaya deity, 2. inviting and dissolving the wisdom
deity, and 3. focusing the mind on a clear appearance of the deity’s form.

1. Visualizing the Samaya Deity

This has two parts: 1. establishing the framework through the three meditative concentrations
and 2. generating the result, the palace and deities of the maṇḍala.

1. Establishing the Framework through the Three Meditative Concentrations

Recite the mantra “oṃ mahā-śūnyatā…etc.” while settling in its meaning, which is that all phenomena
included within dualistic perception are completely purified into great non-dual wisdom,
whose nature is indestructible.

The text to be recited may be explained as follows. The line that begins, “All things in saṃsāra
and nirvāṇa…” refers to the meditative concentration of suchness. All these phenomena
that are visible and audible to us and to others have always been utterly pure and naturally
luminous. They are none other than the great emptiness of the indestructible, all-pervading
space of suchness. Rest for a long time in that space-like experience devoid of appearance.
This serves to cleanse and purify the state of death. By planting the seed of actualizing
the dharmakāya, you create the interdependent circumstances for the result to be perfected.
This ripens you and lays the foundation for the luminosity of the higher path of
the completion phase to arise in your mind. When it is said that purifying the state of death
is the dharmakāya this shows the connection between ground and fruition, and how we should
cultivate confidence in that relationship, which we should maintain throughout the following
sections of the practice.

The second line refers to the all-illuminating meditative concentration, in which, out of an
experience of great, all-pervading space beyond conceptual elaboration, you feel a great,
illusion-like compassion, free of grasping, towards the illusory objects, all beings who
lack such realization and who appear while being devoid of true existence. Through the power
of the pervasive unity of these two,[11] you develop the thought, “I shall lead them to
the level of supreme awakening!” This purifies the intermediate state (bardo) and creates
the interdependent circumstances for perfecting the result of the saṃbhogakāya. It lays the
foundation for great compassion, the cause of arising out of clear light as a deity of
union.

The third line refers to the causal meditative concentration. Causal awareness arises instantly
in space as a white syllable tāṃ, shining like a crystal. It emanates five-coloured light
rays, as if a rainbow had arisen in a pristine sky, in every direction, without boundary
or limit. They purify all grasping at the world and its inhabitants as ordinary and create
a vast, expansive sphere of protection like the one visualized earlier. This purifies
all unfavourable conditions and obstacles concerning the place of birth in the next life,
creates the interdependent circumstances for overcoming the four demons at the time of fruition,
and lays the foundation for eliminating any obstacles or potential pitfalls in the
practice of the channels, wind-energies and essences during the completion phase.

2. Generating the Result, the Palace and Deities of the Maṇḍala.

Rays of light radiate from tāṃ, the cause of the protective sphere, and transform the maṇḍalas
of space, wind, fire, water and earth, together with Mount Meru, into their utterly pure
essences in the vast expanse of Dhātviśvarī, Samayatārā, Pāṇḍarāvasinī, Māmakī, and Buddhalocanā.
Upon Mount Meru is an expansive ground, smooth and level, formed of vajra earth
and dust. In its centre is a blossoming lotus flower, made of jewels, multicoloured and with
a hundred thousand petals, at the heart of which is a sun maṇḍala, as wide as the flower
itself. In its centre is a crossed vajra with twelve prongs – three white prongs in the
east, three yellow prongs in the south, three red prongs in the west, three green prongs in
the north, and blue in the middle. Visualize the palace at their centre. This purifies the
foundation of the outer world, formed on the basis of the five elements and Mount Meru,
for any location of birth as a sentient being. It creates the interdependent circumstance
for the result and perfection within the dharmadhātu space of the five mothers, the realm
in which all buddhas awaken. It lays the foundation for the completion phase, when the five
elements and Mount Meru, which are the five chakras and the central channel, and the lotus,
the sun and the crossed vajra, which are the chakras within the channels, the wind-energies
and essences, are all made pliant and workable.

At the hub of the crossed vajra is the palace of great liberation, immeasurable in extent, made
of precious jewels and white crystal. It is square and has four doors, one on each of
its four sides. Each door has eight causal and resultant toraṇas.[12] The eight resultant
toraṇas consist of a pedimental beam, a beam with a lotus-motif, a beam with box-motif bevelling,
white pearl pendant ornaments, a jewelled beam, tassels and garlands, cornice and
beams with a rainspout motif, and a roofed canopy.[13] The eight causal toraṇas are said to
be in eight tiers on the outside of the doors, much like a staircase. The palace is further
adorned with the terracrs of sense pleasure, the golden brick frieze, chains and hanging
elements, sharbu ornaments, pagoda roof, and so on. In its centre, the summit made of stacked
elements is topped with a vajra made of precious material. The palace radiates rays
of light everywhere and has no distinction between interior and exterior. Nothing is obstructing.
The sixteen offering goddesses dance on the red terraces of sense pleasure and hold
offering substances aloft. Immediately inside the vajra fence visualize the perimeter of
worldly deities, the guardians of all that is good, such as the seventy-five glorious protectors,
abide. This is what the great treasure-revealing lord guru himself said.[14]

Visualize in the centre of this perfectly constituted palace a white, four-petalled lotus, upon
which a sun-disk (below) and a moon-disk (above) symbolize the white and red essences.
The palace purifies all forms of residence in which beings might live or move about. The
lotus, sun and moon purify the semen and blood in the mother’s womb for womb and egg birth,
and, of the other two types of birth, the birth from warmth and moisture. They also purify
the habitual tendencies that cause attachment and clinging to environment and body. This
creates the interdependent circumstances for actualizing the great palace as a natural manifestation
of primordial wisdom at the time of the result. During completion phase practice,
the palace represents the qualities of clarity, emptiness and bliss within a mind in
which the channels, essences and wind-energies have merged as one. The lotus seat represents
the chakra of channels at the [crown of the] head, the sun the chakra of channels at the
navel and red essence below, and the moon represents the chakra of channels at the crown
and white essence above. This lays the foundation for the state of union of all aspects of
the kāyas and wisdoms of supremely immutable great bliss, in which the sixteen aspects of
the four joys rise and descend through the blazing and dripping of the blissful fire of
tummo.

The generation of the supported, the deities, is as follows. In the space between the united
sun and moon is the causal syllable tāṃ. Moon, sun and seed syllable conjoin, merging as
one within the essence of great bliss, out of which rays of light shoot out and fill the sky,
making offerings to the noble ones, waking the śrāvakas from cessation, and bringing those
on the path to the level of no more learning. The rays of light combine with the blessings
of the victorious ones and their heirs throughout the ten directions. The vital essence
of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa and all the splendour of existence and peace gather together and
dissolve into the mass of light rays, which transforms instantly into the completely perfect
form of the deity.

This purifies the coming together of the white and red essences in the womb and the entrance
of a consciousness from the intermediate state, as well as the combination of blood, semen
and consciousness following the experience of transformation based on a potential father
and mother’s sexual intercourse. The radiation and reabsorption of light rays purifies the
gradual development of the body in the womb, which comes about through the potential of
the four primary elements and the ten winds, which produce the aggregates, elements and sense
sources. The full manifestation of the deity’s form purifies the development of the foetus
within the womb and its eventual birth. It also creates interdependent circumstances
for the time of the result: for buddhas to take on whatever forms are appropriate for beings
to be trained and for displaying the deeds such as taking birth from a womb.

When practicing the completion phase, the significance of the union of the sun and moon is as
mentioned before; or else, it signifies the union of bliss and warmth at the site of knots
in the chakras within the central channel. The seed syllable represents wind-energy and
mind entering the central channel and dissolving there. The radiation and reabsorption of
light rays represents the bliss-emptiness that arises from melting bliss. The full manifestation
of the deity’s form lays the foundation for attaining the supreme wisdom kāya, the
inseparable union of natural, co-emergent bliss and emptiness.

In essence, Tārā is the mother who gives birth to the four types of noble ones,[15] the Lady
of the Transcendent Perfection of Insight (prajñāpāramitā), wisdom endowed with all qualities
arising as an illusory, magical manifestation. She is the supreme mother who gives birth
to all the victorious ones of the three times, the embodiment of enlightened activity,
the venerable and noble lady, Wish-Fulfilling Wheel. Her body is white and luminous, the
colour of the moon or crystal, and immaculate. She has one face and two hands. Her hands are
extremely supple, straight, and soft like the palāśa tree.[16] Her right hand makes the
gesture of supreme generosity. Her left hand, held at her left breast, is in the mudrā of
granting refuge, and between her thumb and ring finger she holds the stem—supple, delicate
and fresh—of a white utpala flower, which blossoms at the level of her ear. The flower is
mid-bloom, and supports a long-life vase made of crystal and adorned with the fruits of
a wish-fulfilling tree. To the right is a fruit-bearing flower and to the left a flower that
is closed.

She is peaceful and smiling, and astonishingly beautiful. Her body is lithe and supple. Her
waist is slender and her breasts prominent and attractive. Her secret lotus is not visible.
Half of her hair is bound up in a topknot, adorned with a jewel at its crest; the rest hangs
loosely behind both ears. The hair is pitch black, the colour of a bee. Her eyes are
wide and beautiful with high brows. Her nose and lips are unblemished and attractive. She
is seated upright, with a slender waist and her legs crossed in vajra posture. She wears a
silken lower garment of various colours, which hangs like a warrior’s bow, a blue-coloured
sash, a lower garment of red silk, an upper garment of dark blue silk, a crown featuring
the crests of jewels, earrings studded with various gems, a choker, armlets, bracelets and
anklets, a belt, a necklace that extends to her breasts, and a necklace that extends to
her navel. She has eyes on the soles of her feet and the palms of her hands, and her face
has eyes to the right and left and in the centre—seven eyes which contribute to her dazzling
beauty.

Her male consort, Lotus Lord of the Dance (Pema Garwang), is born of her own radiance. Since
he is the appearing aspect of skilful means, his body is white with a tinge of red, and he
is filled with passion. He has a peaceful, smiling expression. His right hand holds a red
lotus and his left hand a vase of longevity. He is beautifully adorned with silken garments
and jewelled ornaments. Seated in cross-legged lotus posture, he embraces the main deity.
They are united in the great bliss and emptiness of the union of means and insight, and
they abide in an expanse of boundless wisdom light.

At Tārā’s head, upon a moon-disk seat, visualize a white syllable oṃ; at her throat, upon a
red eight-petalled lotus, a red syllable āḥ; and at her heart, upon a sun-disk seat, a blue
syllable hūṃ. These syllables have the nature of Vairocana, Amitābha, and Akṣobhya respectively.


2. Inviting the Wisdom Maṇḍala

Consider that rays of light, like hooks and with all the brilliant radiance of a billion suns,
radiate from the three seed syllables at your three places and invite the maṇḍala of wisdom
deities. Summon them, draw them in, bind them and delight them with “jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ…etc.”.
In this way, request the wisdom deities to remain steadfastly and joyfully.

You may also pay homage, make offerings and offer praise in the following concise manner. First,
chant “a la la ho!” to express wonder and amazement at the qualities of the principal
goddess’ body, speech and mind. Then, offer symbolic homage in the understanding that the
deities—the indivisble union of samayasattvas and jñānasattvas—are the powerful radiance
of the genuine nature of your own mind. Goddesses who emanate from your heart hold aloft the
regular outer offerings and the inner offerings of the five sensory delights. They present
the secret offerings: billowing clouds of amṛta emanating further offering goddesses;
rakta produced by the liberation of all malevolent beings throughout the three realms, with
red goddesses emerging from strings of bubbles on the surface; and the great torma made
of samaya substances, the whole outer world, which further emanates boundless sensory delights.
Your undefiled sense faculties revel in delight, as the goddesses dissolve into the
deities. Satisfied by the taste of wisdom in which subject and object are indivisible, you
complete the great accumulations. Simply put, the offering of suchness refers to the fact
that the offerings, those who offer them, and their recipients are none other than the all-pervading
space that has always been utterly pure. The vajra goddesses who emanate from
you extol the qualities of the principal goddess, perform the dance of bliss, and offer praise
with sweet-sounding songs. At the end, the goddesses dissolve into you.

3. Focusing the Mind on a Clear Appearance of the Deity’s Form

Focus your mind on the general form of the deity, the great mudrā, in which the samaya and wisdom
forms are indivisible. You are the principal goddess in union with her consort, their
bodies, faces and arms all complete—empty in essence, blissful in nature, yet clearly apparent.
The deities are the union of appearance and emptiness, appearing without obstruction
in the form of light that has the essence of wisdom, like the moon’s reflection in clear
water. Bring this vividly to mind.

If the appearance is unclear, direct your mental and visual focus single-pointedly to a painted
image of the samaya deity. Consider that your own body instantly adopts such features.
By meditating repeatedly in short sessions many times, your visualization will last longer
and become progressively clearer. But your visualization should not be flat like a painted
image or concrete like a statue. Train carefully and consistently in recognizing the inseparability
of the deity—as the essence of dharmakāya, form of saṃbhogakāya, and expressive
display of nirmāṇakāya—and your own sense of identity. This unites the generation and completion
phases.

Mental focus such as this is vitally important in and of itself. When you hear the name of someone
you have met before, for example, you can instantly recall the person’s physique and
facial appearance. We must recall the form of the deity in a similar way. One key is to
meditate on occasions when the wind-energies and mind are clear, such as at night. Then, after
visualizing the deity as a whole, focus on particular features, such as her central eye,
or the tip of the jewel at her crown down to her seats, the lotus and moon disk. Visualize
her form without ornaments, then with them. Focus your mind on these individual aspects
until each appears clearly. Then focus your mind, with unwavering clarity, on all aspects
simultaneously.

No matter what your focus might be, direct your mind one-pointedly in a balanced way, neither
too tightly nor too loosely. Allow your mind to relax completely. If you lose your hold
on the clear appearance, alert yourself; if the visualization becomes unclear because of the
thoughts raging in your mind, then relax. Should your thoughts become extremely disruptive,
then stop and turn instead to reciting the mantra and so on. This is how you should eliminate
the flaws of dullness and agitation as you visualize. On occasion, consider how your
body, speech and mind have never been ordinary and how you are in fact the Blessed Lady
of the fruition, with all faults exhausted and all qualities perfected. By intensifying
the deity’s clear appearance in this way and focusing your mind on the notion that this represents
the deity in actuality, as your familiarity increases you will develop a continuous
sense of actually being the deity.

Remembering the Purity

The features of a deity’s form are not like those of a coarse ordinary body brought about through
the force of karma and destructive emotions. Rather, the qualities of the three secrets
of the deities who have reached the ultimate fruition take on symbolic forms that hold
significance in the perception of those to be tamed.

The natural state of the ground, which has always been utterly pure by nature, is indivisible
from the resultant kāyas and wisdoms. To maintain the life-force of the practice by focusing
on nothing other than the outward expression of this nature at the time of the path is
the purity of one’s own awareness. Through the blessing of this, appearance and existence
arise as the maṇḍala of deities, which is the purity of phenomena as individual deities.
To apply the seal of the view that is inexpressible and beyond arising, remaining and ceasing,
and meditate on the union of appearance and emptiness is the purity of the suchness
nature of phenomena. Practise by combining these three forms of purity with clear appearance
and remembering the pride [of being the deity].

Remembering the Purity of Individual Aspects

Since all phenomena are of one taste within suchness, Tārā has a single face. Her two hands
represent skilful means and insight, and her cross-legged vajra posture signifies the elimination
of the extremes of existence and quiescence. The union of male and female deities
represents appearance and emptiness. As a sign that she was born from the tears of the Lord
of the World as part of the lotus family that is free of attachment and that she is overflowing
with compassion, her body has the colour of the lustrous moon. As a signal of her
love for beings, she smiles serenely and has an amorous demeanour. Her right hand is in the
mudrā of supreme generosity as a sign that she bestows the attainments of longevity and
wisdom. To signify that she grants beings protection from fear and that the secret of her
wisdom mind—profound, peaceful and beyond conceptual elaboration—is the Lady of the Transcendent
Perfection of Insight, the mother of all the victorious ones, her left hand is in the
mudrā of granting refuge. To symbolize her unobstructed enlightened activity, she holds
the stem of a white utpala at her heart. The flower, which blossoms at the level of her ear,
supports a long-life vase to signify overcoming fear of untimely death. As a sign of her
perfection of virtuous qualities and care for others, some of her hair is bound in a topknot
while the remainder hangs loose. To signify her freedom from the torment of negative
emotions, she wears silken upper and lower garments. Her silk and jewel accessories signify
the seven factors of enlightenment and how she has not abandoned sensory delights but enjoys
them as adornments. She is embraced by the male consort, Lotus Lord of the Dance (Pema
Garwang), who is her very own radiance and represents skilful means, supremely immutable
great bliss and wisdom’s aspect of appearance. The palace has the nature of the symbols,
significance and signs of the thirty-seven factors of enlightenment. The vajra fence is impervious
to conceptual thought. The surrounding mass of flames signifies that habitual tendencies
of conceptual thought have been overcome. Thus, the recollection of such individual
examples of purity serves to counteract any clinging to these features as ordinary. Training
in this recollection of purity, which connects ground and fruition, serves as an immediate
cause for the supreme accomplishment of the generation phase.

In this way, you must visualize everything to its fullest extent with clarity, stability and
purity, in stages, from the palace, vajra fence and mountains of flame on the outside through
to the principal deity within.

Meditating on the phase of generating the deity in this manner purifies the following: at the
ground stage, being born as a child, growing up, being tormented by feelings of desire and
seeking to fulfil them, taking a spouse, gradually developing one’s physical, verbal and
mental capacity, and taking on the affairs of one’s family. The result of purification is
to be born as a nirmāṇakāya buddha, to renounce the world and practice asceticism in pursuit
of awakening, to arrive at the seat of awakening (bodhimaṇḍa), tame Māra, develop meditative
concentration and gain mastery of omniscient wisdom. In relation to the higher paths,
this lays the foundation for arising in the deity’s form based on bliss, wind-energy and
mind in order to accomplish the body of the wisdom deity of bliss and emptiness. It also
lays the foundation for remaining inseparable from either a karma or wisdom mudrā in order
to attain the supreme accomplishment. It us thus the basis for gaining ever-greater familiarity
with naturally arisen wisdom and thereby swiftly arriving at the supreme accomplishment.
In this way, the meditation serves as a means of ripening.

The blessing of the three places purifies your ordinary body, speech and mind. The means of
purification are the three vajras. The result of purification is the attainment of the three
secrets of all the buddhas.

The invitation of the wisdom deities and request that they remain have as their objects of purification
the habitual tendencies of children to develop like the other beings of the category
in which they are born and to gain a similar level of intelligence. The means of purification
is the absorption of the natural maṇḍala of wisdom deities into the maṇḍala of
samaya forms. The result of purification is to merge as one with the realization of all the
Thus-Gone Ones.

The stages of activities such as paying homage have as their objects of purification the habitual
tendencies of childish beings who indulge in sensory pleasures and pursue mundane concerns.
The means of purification are to pay homage in recognition of the indivisibility of
all-pervading space and wisdom, to make outer, inner and secret offerings, and to offer
praise while remembering the qualities of the three secrets. The result of such purification
is to create the interdependent circumstances for the effortless arising of infinite offerings
at the time of buddhahood and for becoming worthy of the reverence of all throughout
saṃsāra and nirvāṇa.

This is in harmony with the following lines from the Profound Essence of Tārā:

Generate the maṇḍala of support and the supported.With clear appearance, stable prideAnd recollection
of purity, cultivate a clear appearance.By reaching the limit of utmost clarity,Which
has the ability to halt clinging to appearances as ordinary...[17]

2. The Explanation of Enlightened Speech: The Mantra Recitation

When you become tired of meditating in such a way, you need to train in meditative concentration
on the mantra recitation in order to enhance your practice. As the section on the visualization
for mantra recitation states:

I am the sublime Tārā: in my heart,
Is the jñānasattva Amitāyus.
Brilliant white…

In the centre of Tārā’s heart is a white, four-petalled lotus. On its anther is a locket of
the conjoined sun (below) and moon (on top), in the centre of which is a white tāṃ, bright
and radiant and surrounded by the ten-syllable mantra, the combined mantra, the mantra of
the wisdom deity[18] and the mantra of the nirmāṇasattva.[19] They are all joined together
and arranged in a clockwise direction. Focus your mind on them, and, as you do so, consider
that limitless rays of light stream out from the life-force at the deity’s heart and the
mantra-garland. They emerge from the top of her crown and send out many forms of the Noble
Lady Uṣṇīṣavijayā, who is white and has one face and two hands—the right hand, which is
in the gesture of granting refuge and resting on her right knee, forms the threatening mudrā
and holds an iron hook as a means of summoning; the left hand, which is at the level
of her heart and in the gesture of supreme generosity, holds a long-life vase from which there
flows a stream of ambrosia. She is seated in the cross-legged posture of a female bodhisattva.
Her forms are as numerous as specks of dust in a sunbeam. They gather the wisdom
of knowledge, love and power from the infinite victorious ones of the three roots, vajra
dharma protectors and wealth deities, as well as the vital essence of the inanimate world
and animate beings throughout saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, in the form of ambrosia, light rays and
refined quicksilver. They dissolve into the subtle essences of one’s own body, speech and
mind, bringing the attainment of longevity and wisdom and accomplishment of the vital force
of vajra-like immortality. Consider all this as you recite the mantra.

‘Refined quicksilver’ is the substance of ‘extracting the essence’.[20] It is white like the
autumn moon and radiates rays of light like the sun. It swirls clockwise and forms various
patterns of auspicious signs of accomplishment, such as svastikas and coils of joy. Its
power is such that whoever it touches gains the strength of an elephant, the longevity of
the sun and moon, and a vajra body. It has the power to grant the youthfulness and vigour
of a sixteen-year-old. It can transform iron into gold, at the merest touch. Scattering it
over a dried-up tree will cause it to sprout new leaves, fruits and flowers instantaneously.
It is said that you should meditate on such forms as blazing with the splendour of great
bliss.

In general, regarding the turning of the mantra garland, it is said that the approach phase
emphasizes the arrangement; close approach emphasizes rotation; accomplishment emphasizes
the ‘palanquin’ (doli); and great accomplishment emphasizes the radiation and absorption [of
light rays]. Ordinarily, however, it suffices to focus only on the arrangement. Then, once
you manage to visualize the arrangement clearly, you can begin to imagine its rotation.
At that time, consider that countless rays of light stream out (in the manner explained
above) from the mantra garland, which rotates rapidly clockwise as it emits its own sound.
For the recitation, those who have not yet undertaken a retreat on the approach phase should
emphasize the ten-syllable mantra, while those who have done so should focus mainly on
the combined mantra. Recite a few mantras of the wisdom deity and nirmāṇasattva as well.


This daily practice brings the three aspects of approach, accomplishment and activity together
as one.

On occasion, therefore, consider that rays of light stream out from the mantra garland, ablaze
with the splendour of the wisdom of great bliss, so that all that is animate and inanimate
throughout the three realms is perfected as the maṇḍala of the great illusory net—deities,
mantra and wisdom. Or consider that the mantra garland arises uninterruptedly from the
life-force syllable tāṃ, passes through the mouth of the wisdom deity and into the mouth
of the principal goddess. It enters the mouth of the male consort, passes through his body,
and flows from his secret vajra into the female deity’s secret space before dissolving
into the life-force syllable. By turning like a whirling firebrand in this way, it engenders
the wisdom of great bliss in the enlightened minds of the male and female deities. Consider
that you attain the naturally arising, permanent and sacred accomplishment of supreme,
unchanging deathlessness, and recite the combined mantra. That is the visualization for
accomplishment. Or, as you recite the combined mantra, consider that rays of light, in colours
that correspond to the four types of activity, shoot out from her heart, fill the sky
like messengers, and carry out all forms of supreme enlightened action—pacifying, enriching,
magnetizing and subjugating—according to your wishes.

Do not interrupt the recitation with ordinary words or speech. You must recite the mantras with
stable, single-pointed concentration. Should you grow tired of focussing on a single visualization,
settle the mind for a time on the clear appearance of the deities’ form. Or
spend time generating compassion for those beings whose accumulated karma results in a short
life. At times, recite the mantra with a clear, stable perception of all sights and sounds
as the venerable Tārā. Most importantly, it is by reciting the mantra while sustaining
an experience of the view, with faith and devotion devoid of doubt, and with an understanding
of the inseparability of deity and mantra, that you will swiftly accomplish the supreme
and common attainments. No matter how much you might recite with a mind that is distracted,
you will only succeed in slightly reducing your obscurations of speech and will not accomplish
your desired aim. As the great guru of Oḍḍiyāna said:

Recite with undistracted concentration.Otherwise, should you become distracted,Even reciting
for an aeon will yield no result.

The counting mālā should be authentic and consecrated.

The Magnificent [Wisdom] Lightning Tantra says:

Neither too loud nor too soft,Neither too fast nor too slow,Neither too strong nor too weak,Not
omitting any of the syllables,Not distracted nor while talking,Not interrupted by chatter
or the like.

Avoid such faults as you recite the mantra. At times, hold your breath and perform the silent
recitation while remembering the mantra’s form and sound, or practise the mental recitation
in which you let go even of holding the breath and focus on the mantra’s form or sound
as you recite it in your mind.

The object of purification here is clinging to deluded language,[21] the verbal utterances of
names, words and syllables, within the impure saṃsāric domain, together with associated
habitual tendencies. The means of purification is verbal recitation performed repeatedly.
Once such recitation has purified verbal processes and the sounds that they produce, the result
of purification is to lay the foundation for acts that will benefit beings through vajra
speech, such as by turning the wheel of Dharma, once you yourself have attained enlightenment.
This also purifies general faults, especially those of the mind, and brings about
the power of speech.

As you call upon the wisdom deities repeatedly by name using mantras, it is inevitable that
you will become close to them. Given that the deities take the form of these mantras, you
should meditate on their seed syllables and perform the recitation with the confidence that
they are mantras of wisdom awareness. As a result, they will definitely take the form of
mantras and the connection cannot but be established. In the shorter term you will accomplish
the four types of activity, especially the increase of longevity, merit and wisdom, and
ultimately this will serve as the uncommon, direct cause for obtaining vajra speech.

At the end of your session, make up for any additions or omissions and stabilize [the effects
of practice] by reciting the vowels and consonants and the mantra of the essence of interdependent
origination. Perform the offerings and praise in brief form and confess any mistakes
with the hundred-syllable mantra. Consider that the appearances of the deities dissolve
into the all-pervading space of luminosity, like breath evaporating from the surface of
a mirror. Or else, imagine that rays of light shoot out from the heart of the principal
deity, touch the whole world and its inhabitants, causing them to melt into light and dissolve
into the palace. The palace then dissolves in the principal deities. The male consort
dissolves into the female deity. She then gradually disappears, beginning at her feet and
head, and dissolves into the tāṃ, which disappears from the bottom upwards until all that
remains is the nāda, extremely subtle, on which you focus your mind. Then, rest in the state
of luminosity beyond reference.

Instantly arise, once again, in the body of union and recite the three syllables [oṃ āḥ hūṃ]
to seal your three doors as the three vajras. Remain inseparable from the ‘three carry-overs’:[22]
recognising yourself and all other appearances as the enlightened body of the Noble
Lady, all sound as her enlightened speech, and all thoughts as her enlightened mind. Conclude
by dedicating the merit and reciting whichever prayers of auspiciousness are appropriate.
Then commence your daily activities.

The object of purification here is the death that reoccurs once youth is exhausted: the gradual
dissolution of the supporting [maṇḍala] and supported [deities] represents the phases
of the outer and inner dissolution and dharmakāya luminosity at the time of death, while arising
once more as the deity corresponds to the bardo of becoming. The means of purification
are the stages of dissolution and re-emergence. As the result of purification, since the
appearance aspect of rūpakāya, which is the activity of the dharmakāya, and dharmakāya
wisdom are both by nature basic space, the rūpakāya manifestations, which are absorbed into
and emanate from this nature, will benefit beings uninterruptedly.

3. The Explanation of Enlightened Mind: Concise Instructions on the Suchness of the Completion
Phase

The dissolution of the generation phase into luminosity and its re-emergence therefrom, as discussed
above, eliminates the extremes of permanence and nihilism. This is when you practise
the yoga of the non-thematic completion phase, which may be briefly explained as follows.
The Profound Essence of Tārā says:

Naturally arisen, momentary awarenessIs brought within inconceivable basic space.From the illustrative
wisdom of exampleThe absolute co-emergent is made evident.And Vajra Tārā, who possesses
the three changeless essences,Is accomplished in this life.[23]

As these vajra words suggest, the genuine nature of mind as such is not a real entity with concrete
attributes and therefore not something permanent or autonomous. Nor is it non-existent,
since it provides an unceasing basis for the arising of the various experiences of saṃsāra
and nirvāṇa. The fact that mere clarity and awareness does not cease means that it
is not nothing whatsoever. It is also free from the extremes of both and neither, and thus
transcends all forms of labelling, thought and expression. That is the view.

Taking the guru’s pith instructions as a basis, do not think of anything and do not entertain
any ideas. While experiencing the natural state, do not alter your mind with mental fabrication
but simply leave it as it is. Do not be distracted from this space-like experience
for even an instant. Leave penetrating awareness in its natural condition, and do not waver
from an awareness that is objectless, naturally clear, vivid and distinct. That is the
meditation that unites calm abiding (śamatha) and clear seeing (vipaśyanā).

Out of such a view and meditation, generate confidence during the post-meditation that all phenomena
are illusory. Work for beings’ welfare through the union of emptiness and compassion
and let all your experience and activity serve as a support for the wisdom of co-emergent
great bliss. That is the conduct.

Through becoming familiar with this training, you will actualize the natural state of the ground,
in which there is nothing to gain or lose, and encounter the natural face of the ultimate
venerable and noble lady, the transcendent perfection of insight. That is the result.
First, the wisdom of example arises during the paths of accumulation and joining. Then,
as this becomes increasingly familiar, you reach the path of seeing and realize the ultimate
wisdom. Finally, you arrive at the level of no more learning.

You must strive to perfect this quartet of view, meditation, conduct and fruition.As regards
the definitive nature of the generation and completion phases, the later chapter of the Guhyasamāja[24]
says:

The Dharma that the buddhas revealGenuinely consists of two phases:There is the phase of generationAnd
the phase of completion.

As this says, there is the generation phase, which purifies our grasping at the ordinary appearances
of the world and its inhabitants, and the non-thematic completion phase, which naturally
and effortlessly binds wind-energy and mind within the indestructible essence and
brings about the kāya endowed with the supreme of all qualities. This concludes the explanation
of both.

Among the countless profound ways of achieving immortality,The one that stands as exalted as
Meru is that of the Blessed One,The Noble Lady Tārā, known as ‘Wish-Fulfilling Wheel’,A deity
that vidyādharas in their millions have adored.

Her sādhana, which draws upon the experience and realizationOf three masters[25] is the Noble
Lady’s heart essence,Definitive and complete, the yoga of the single mudrā,Explained here
in these stages of profound instruction.

My explanation draws on the omniscient guru’s nectar-like wordsAnd the teachings of scholars
and adepts of the past.Even though it is unspoilt by fabrications of my own,If it is sullied
by the stains of my own ignorance, forgive me!

Whatever stores of virtue might arise from this,I dedicate entirely for the teachings and beings,In
keeping with Tārā’s aspirations and those of the lords of the three families.Through
this, may I never experience the cause or result of untimely death!

Nourished by the food of practising the two phases,May my body become as steadfast as a mighty
vajra,My speech blaze with the power of prophetic truth,And all my thoughts arise as great
luminosity!

May the lives of the glorious masters remain secure,The Dharma melody of their secret speech
resound unceasingly,And the mirrors of their wisdom minds of twofold knowledge remain untainted,And
thus may they be of perfect service to the teachings and beings!

In all my lives, may I be guided by great spiritual friendsAnd may I receive the nectar of the
Dharma.May I please my venerable gurusAnd never tire of carrying out their enlightened
activity!

May the teachings and holders of the teachings flourish and spread,May patrons act according
to the Dharma and lead long, ever more affluent lives.And may I accomplish the three secrets
of the Wish-Fulfilling Wheel,She who is victorious over the enemy, the demon of the Lord
of Death!

May the auspiciousness of an excellent stream of ambrosiaThat bestows supreme immortality flow
down into our crowns,So that we obtain the splendour of immortal vajra lifeAnd ascend to
the kingdom of supreme accomplishment!

These instructions on the view of the Single-Form Daily Practice of the Heart Essence of the
Sublime Lady of Immortality were given by the Lord and great treasure revealer, Lama Pema
Ösal Dongak Lingpa, to our glorious master, the omniscient Situ Rinpoche, from whom I, Jamyang
Lodrö Gyatso, received the transmission and explanation. I wrote this entirely on the
third day of the twelfth month. May it be a cause for all beings to attain victory in the
battle with the Lord of Death and for the lives of those supreme beings who are the holders
of the teachings to remain firm and endure for hundreds of aeons! Maṅgalaṃ!

| Translated by Han Kop, Adam Pearcey and Gyurme Avertin, 2021. With the kind assistance of
Alak Zenkar Rinpoche, Khenchen Pema Sherab, Khenpo Sonam Tsewang and Sean Price.