The Single-Form Daily Practice from Chimé Pakmé Nyingtik (The Heart Essence of the Sublime Lady
of Immortality)
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

Homage to the guru, the sublime Tārā!
Here is the daily yoga practice of Chimé Pakmé Nyingtik as a single deity, the essence of the
root sādhana called 'Trinlé Yeshé Nangwa—The Wisdom Light of Enlightened Activity'. There
are three sections: the preliminary, the main practice and the conclusion.
I. The Preliminary
Someone who has correctly received the empowerment for this practice, who keeps the samayas
and vows, who has trained the mind in the absolute and relative bodhicitta, and who has unswerving
diligence, should take to a secluded place and embark on the conduct conducive to
meditation.
dün gyi namkhar kyabné kündü lama yishyin khorlö chen ngar rangshyen yichen tamché go sum jukpa
chikpé kyab su sol shying semkyepar möpé
I imagine that in the sky before me appears the guru, the Wish-fulfilling Wheel, in whom all
sources of refuge are embodied. Before her, I and all other sentient beings, with our body,
speech and mind focused on one single aim, take refuge and arouse bodhicitta.
1. Taking Refuge
namo, dak sok dro kün changchub bar
Namo! Until we attain enlightenment, I and all sentient beings
könchok sum gyi ngowo nyi
Take refuge with unwavering devotion
lama yishyin khorlo la
In you, Guru Wish-fulfilling Wheel, you who are
miché güpé kyab su chi
The very essence of the Three Jewels!
Three times.
2. Generating Bodhicitta
ho, khanyam semchen malü kün
Hoḥ! Sentient beings are as countless as space is vast,
dukngal tso lé draljé chir
In order to free them from the ocean of suffering
jetsün pakmé naljor gyi
By attaining immortality through this yoga of 'the exalted lady' Tārā,
chimé drubpar semkyé do
I arouse bodhicitta, the heart of the enlightened mind.
Three times.
hung hung hung
hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ
The natural sound of this vajra mantra drives all malevolent forces far away.
benza jnana raksha ah hung
vajra-jnāna-rakṣa aḥ hūṃ
Visualize that with this you have stabilized the protective circle.
If you have real offerings prepared, then recite:
om ah hung sarva pudza megha samayé hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ sarva-pūjā-megha-samaye hūṃ
With this mantra, consecrate them, together with the 'Space Treasury Mudrā'.
II. The Main Practice
The main practice is composed of two phases: 1) the principal phase which is to cultivate the
practice of meditative equipoise (nyamshyak) through focusing on the deity, and 2) the subsidiary
phase: to practise the concentration (samten) of the mantra recitation.
1. Meditation on the Deity
Meditation on the deity entails three steps: a) creating a clear visualization of the samayasattvas
b) inviting and absorbing the jñānasattvas c) keeping the mind focused on the vivid
presence and clear perception of the form of the deity.
a) Visualization of the Samayasattvas
Here, the 'cause' is the framework of the three samādhis, and the 'result' is the development
of the maṇḍala of 'support and supported' (the palace and the deities). You should make
the visualization and your recitation match one another throughout:
om maha shunyata jnana benza sobhava emako hang
oṃ mahā-śūnyatā-jñāna-vajra-svabhāvātmako ’ham
khordé chö kün zöma né
All things in saṃsāra and nirvāṇa are primordially
ösal deshyin nyi ying lé
Clear light and the space of suchness.
zungjuk kün nang nyingjé tsal
Their union, all-illuminating compassion
gyu yi tingdzin tam karpo
Arises as the causal samādhi, a white tāṃ,
kha lé jatsön shyindu shar
Appearing like a rainbow in the sky and
ö trö nöchü ngödzin jang
Sending out light that purifies clinging to a reality in the world and beings.
jung nga yum gyi kha long du
Within the expanse of the five elements, the five consorts,
norbu chushel lé drubpé
Stands the celestial mansion of great liberation,
tarpa chenpö shyalmé khang
Formed of precious crystal,
dru shyi go shyi tsennyi dzok
With four sides, four doors, and all its features complete.
dé ü pema dab shyi teng
In its centre, on a four-petalled lotus, are
tabshé nyida khajor ü
Skillful means and wisdom—sun and moon fused together,
zungjuk tam yik nyompar shyuk
In the centre of which is the syllable taṃ, as their union,
dé lé ö trö pakpa chö
Which sends out light as an offering to the noble ones,
khordé dangchü chik tu dü
Gathering and bringing back the quintessence of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, whereupon
yong gyur yeshe gyumé ku
It transforms into the magical body of wisdom,
dü sum gyalwé trinlé dak
The enlightened activity of buddhas of past, present, and future,
chimé yishyin khorlo ni
Wish-fulfilling Wheel, granter of immortality,
rab kar shyal chik chak nyi ma
Brilliant white, with one face and two hands,
chak yé chokjin yönpa ni
Her right hand in the mudrā of supreme generosity
könchok sum tsön kyab jin gyé
Her left grants refuge, symbolizing the Three Jewels,
utpalar né tsebum nam
And holds an utpala flower, on which rests a vase of longevity.
shyi dzum yeshe chen dün den
Peaceful, smiling, with her seven eyes of wisdom,
dar dang rinchen gyen gyi dzé
She is lovely and adorned with silks and jewelled ornaments,
shyab nyi dorjé kyiltrung gi
Her two legs crossed in vajra posture,
pema dawé den la shyuk
Presiding on her lotus and moon disc seat.
rang ö tab chok gar gyi wang
Her natural radiance is the supreme skilful means, the Lord of the Dance,
pema tsebum nampé tril
Holding lotus flower and long life vase, and embracing her in union.
b) Inviting and Absorbing the Jñānasattvas
dé yi chi drin tukka ru
The crown of their heads, their throats, and hearts,
dorjé sum gyi yigé tsen
Are marked with the syllables of the three vajras,
dé le tröpé özer gyi
From which rays of light stream out and
yeshe sempa chendrang gyur
Invite the jñānasattvas.
Visualize this clearly.
hrih, sosor küntu tokpa yi
Hrīḥ! Deity of long life
yeshe chenpo tsé yi lha
With your supreme wisdom of discernment,
öpakmepé ugyen chen
Crowned by Amitābha, Limitless Light,
dü sum sangye trinléma
Lady who is the enlightened activity of the buddhas of past, present and future,
tsur shek yishyin khorlor chang
Approach, you who manifest as the Wish-fulfilling Wheel!
drub la ngödrub chok tsol chir
So as to confer the supreme siddhi on this practitioner,
damtsik kyilkhor dir gong la
Direct your wisdom mind into this maṇḍala of the samayasattvas,
dorjé yeshe kyé du sol
And arouse in me indestructible vajra wisdom!
samaya ho | samaya tam | é a rali hring hring dza | jnana sato a ah
samaya hoḥ | samaya taṃ | e āralli hrīṃ hrīṃ jaḥ | jñāna-sattva a āḥ |
With this the jñānasattvas are invited, and with:
benza jnana | dza hung bam ho | samaya tishta lhen
jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ | samaya tiṣṭha lhen |
they are summoned, dissolved, bound, pleased, and requested to remain firm.
Paying Homage
If you wish occasionally to perform a concise homage, offering, and praise, pay homage with:
a la la ho | ati pu ho | pratitsa ho
a la la ho | atipu hoḥ | pratiṣṭha hoḥ |
Offerings
om, ngöjor yi kyi nam trulpé
Oṃ! Whether actually present, or manifested by the mind,
chi nang sangwé chödzé kün
All offering substances, outer, inner and secret
pakma yishyin khorlor bul
I offer to you, noble Wish-fulfilling Wheel:
shyé né chimé ngödrub tsol
Accept them and grant me the siddhi of immortality!
om arya tara saparivara argham padam pupé dhupé aloké gendhé nevidé shapta rupa shapta gendhé
rasa parshé pratitsa soha | sarva pentsa amrita maha rakta maha balingta khahi | sarva dharmadhatu
emako hang |
oṃ āryatāre saparivāra arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda rūpa śabda gandha
rāsa sparśa pratīccha svāhā | sarva-pañcāmṛta-mahā-rakta-baliṅta khāhi | sarva-dharmadhātu
atmako ’ham ||
With this, make outer, inner and secret offerings, and the offering of suchness.
Praise
om, jikten wangchuk nyingjé dak
Oṃ! You were born from the tears of Avalokiteśvara,
shyal gyi chukyé lé jungwa
The lord of the world, and master of compassion.
dü sum sangye kyedzé yum
Mother of the Buddhas of past, present and future,
yishyin khorlor chaktsal tö
Wish-fulfilling Wheel, to you I pay homage and offer praise!
With this, offer praises.
c) Focusing the Mind on the Form of the Deity
Focus your mind one-pointedly on a clear image—both the overall outline and the specific details—of
the deity, the 'great mudrā', in which samayasattva and jñānasattva are inseparable.
Feel a sense of firm and stable confidence.
Once an experience of clarity and stability has developed, then by means of recollecting the
pure symbolism of the visualization, which links the ground with the fruition, you train
so that the development stage practice matures into being a direct cause for attaining the
supreme siddhi.
2. The Mantra Recitation
Whenever you become weary of the above meditation, then in order to enhance your practice, train
in the meditative absorption of the mantra recitation.
rangnyi pakmé tukka ru
I am the sublime Tārā: in my heart,
yeshe sempa tsepakmé
Is the jñānasattva Amitāyus.
karsal nyamshyak tsebum dzin
Brilliant white, and holding a long life vase in the mudrā of meditation,
dar dang rinchen gyen gyi dzé
Beautiful with silk and jewelled ornaments,
dorjé kyiltrung pé dar shyuk
In vajra posture on a lotus and moon disc seat,
ö dang özer trowa yi
Shining and emanating rays of light.
tuk ü chukyé nyidé ü
In the centre of his heart is a lotus, and sun and moon discs,
tam tar ngak kyi trengwé kor
In the middle of which is taṃ, encircled by the mantra-mālā.
depé tukdam gyü kul té
Reciting the mantra evokes his wisdom mind, causing
ö kyi nangwa tayepa
A stream of boundless light to burst out
tsuktor norbü tsé né tön
Through the tip of the jewel on the uṣṇīṣa on the crown of my head,
dé lé pakma nampar gyal
From which appears the sublime Vijayā,
chushel dokchen chak yé kyi
The colour of crystal. Her right hand
kyab jin chakgyé chakkyu dang
In the mudrā of granting refuge, holds a hook
yönpé chokjin tsebum nam
Her left, in the mudrā of supreme giving, holds a long life vase.
ö dang özer dang chepa
She radiates light and rays of light, and
drangmé nyizer dul tar trö
Limitless forms of herself, streaming out like particles of dust in sunbeams,
khordé tenyö dangchü kün
Which draw in all the subtle vital essence of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, the animate and inanimate
universe,
dewa chenpö nampar dü
In forms of great bliss, which
dak gi go sum tikler tim
Absorb into the bindus of my body, speech, and mind,
chimé tsé yi ngödrub dang
Granting me the siddhi of immortal life,
dechen yeshe gyepar gyur
And intensifying the wisdom of great bliss.
When you recite and contemplate, maintain an acute awareness of the practice.
om taré tuttaré turé soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture svāhā ||
Make reciting these ten vajra syllables your main focus.
At the end of the session, recite the mantra that combines approach, accomplishment and activity
all in one:
om taré tuttaré turé hrih droom benza jnana ayukhé soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture hrīḥ bhrūṃ vajra-jñānāyuṣe svāhā ||
Recite this as much as is appropriate. Then if you wish to continue, and you can, recite:
om amarani jiwantiyé soha
oṃ amaraṇi jīvantaye svāhā ||
And:
om amrita ayudadé soha
oṃ amṛtāyurdade svāhā ||
Recite these mantras a few times.
III. Conclusion
When you are about to come out of the practice session, recite the vowels and consonants and
the essence of interdependent origination, so as to make up for duplications and omissions,
and to stabilize the effects of the mantra practice.
a a | i i | u u | ri ri | li li | e ai | o au | ang ah | ka kha ga gha nga | cha chha ja jha
nya | ta tha da dha na | ta tha da dha na | pa pha ba bha ma | ya ra la wa sha sha sa ha
ksha | om yé dharma hetu prabhava hetun teshan tatagato hyavadat | teshan tsa yo nirodha evam
vadi maha shramana soha ||
a ā | i ī | u ū | ṛ ṝ | ḷ ḹ | e ai | o au | aṃ | aḥ | ka kha ga gha ṅa | ca cha ja jha ña |
ṭa ṭha ḍa ḍha ṇa | ta tha da dha na | pa pha ba bha ma | ya ra la va śa ṣa sa ha kṣa | oṃ
ye dharmā hetu prabhāvā hetuṃ teṣāṃ tathāgato hyavadat teṣāṃ ca yo nirodha evaṃ vādī mahāśramaṇaḥ
svāhā ||
Then, recite the concise offering and praise and confess any mistakes with the hundred-syllable
mantra:
Offerings
om, ngöjor yi kyi nam trulpé
Oṃ! Whether actually present, or manifested by the mind,
chi nang sangwé chödzé kün
All offering substances, outer, inner, and secret
pakma yishyin khorlor bul
I offer to you, noble Wish-fulfilling Wheel:
shyé né chimé ngödrub tsol
Accept them and grant me the siddhi of immortality!
om arya tara saparivara argham padam pupé dhupé aloké gendhé nevidé shapta rupa shapta gendhé
rasa parshé pratitsa soha | sarva pentsa amrita maha rakta maha balingta khahi | sarva dharmadhatu
emako hang |
oṃ āryatāre saparivāra arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda rūpa śabda gandha
rāsa sparśa pratīccha svāhā | sarva-pañcāmṛta-mahā-rakta-baliṅta khāhi | sarva-dharmadhātu
atmako ’ham ||
Praise
om, jikten wangchuk nyingjé dak
Oṃ! You were born from the tears of Avalokiteśvara,
shyal gyi chukyé lé jungwa
The lord of the world, and master of compassion.
dü sum sangye kyedzé yum
Mother of the Buddhas of past, present and future,
yishyin khorlor chaktsal tö
Wish-fulfilling Wheel, to you I pay homage and offer praise!
Confession of Mistakes in Practice
om benza sato samaya manupalaya benza sato tenopa tishta dridho mé bhava sutokhayo mé bhava
supokhayo mé bhava anurakto mé bhava sarva siddhi mé prayaccha sarva karma su tsa mé tsittam
shreyang kuru hung ha ha ha ha ho bhagavan sarva tatagata benza ma mé muntsa benzi bhava
maha samaya sato ah
oṃ vajrasattva samayam anupālaya vajrasattva-tvenopa-tiṣṭha dṛḍho me bhava sutoṣyo me
bhava supoṣyo me bhava anurakto me bhava sarva-siddhiṃ me prayaccha sarva-karma śuca me cittaṃ
śreyaṃ-kuru hūṃ ha ha ha ha hoḥ bhagavān sarva-tathāgata-vajra mā me muñca vajrī-bhava
mahā-samaya-sattva āh ||
Dissolution
a, rigpa rangnang damtsikpa
A! The samayasattva, rigpa's natural display,
shyal chak tsenma ying su tim
With its attributes, like the face and hands, dissolves into all-pervading space.
lar yang kha lé jatsön tar
Once again, like a rainbow appearing in the sky,
yeshe chenpö rolpar shar
I arise as the play of great primordial wisdom.
With this, dissolve the appearance of the deity into the space of luminosity, and then re-emerge
in the form of the deity, in which appearance and emptiness are one.
om ah hung
oṃ āh hūṃ
Thus seal body, speech, and mind with the three vajras.
Dedication
gewa di yi nyurdu dak
Through the merit of this practice may I swiftly
chimé pakma drub gyur né
Accomplish 'the exalted lady of immortality',
drowa chik kyang malüpa
And so every single sentient being, without exception,
dé yi sa la göpar shok
Be led to that perfect state as well!
With this, recite prayers of dedication and aspiration, along with auspicious prayers that are
appropriate to conclude the session, and engage in daily activities.

The omniscient Vajradhara Lodrö Thayé, whose coming was prophesied by the Buddha, urged me repeatedly
to compose a yoga for beginners offering a complete and definitive path, a yoga
of the single form of the deity, a daily practice which is easy to apply. Because of my profound
faith in him, I honoured his request at the crown of my head. Following exactly the
basic terma text, the Lake-born Guru's favourite servant, Pema Osel Dongak Lingpa, composed
this in the vicinity of the Yiga Chödzin temple, a place delightful to Tārā, at Palpung
monastery. May the merit of this serve as the cause for the glorious and holy gurus’ lives
to remain secure for hundreds of kalpas, and for all limitless beings to realize the wisdom
body of Jetsün Tārā, bestower of immortality.
Maṅgalaṃ!

| Rigpa Translations.

Source: mkhyen brtse'i dbang po. "'phags snying rgyun khyer/" in gsung 'bum/_mkhyen brtse'i
dbang po/. TBRC W21807. 24 vols. Gangtok: Gonpo Tseten, 1977–1980. Vol. 15: 367–373